[Music]
all right so this is cs50
and this is week two where and we're
going to dive in a little more deeply to
see this new language
and we're also going to take a look back
at some of the concepts we looked at
last week so that you can
better understand some of the features
of c and some of the
the steps you've been taking to make
your code work so we'll
peel back some of the layers of
abstraction from last week so that you
better understand really
what's going on underneath the hood of
the computer so of course
last week we began with perhaps the most
canonical of programs in c the most
canonical of programs you can write
pretty much in any language
which is that which says quite simply
hello world but recall that
before we're actually running this
program we have to convert it into the
language the computers themselves speak
which we defined last week as binary
zeros and ones
otherwise known as machine language in
in this context so we have to go somehow
from this source code
to something more like this machine code
the zeros and ones that the computer
actually understands
now you may recall too that we
introduced a command for this and
that command was called make and
literally via this command
make hello could we make a program
called hello and make was a little fancy
it assumed that if you want to make a
program called hello
it would look for a file called hello.c
that just happens automatically for you
and the end result of course was an
additional file called hello
that would end up getting put into your
current directory so you could then do
dot slash hello and be on your way
but it turns out that make is actually
automating
a more specific set of steps for us that
we'll see a little more closely now
instead so on the screen here is exactly
the same code that we wrote last week to
say quite simply hello world
and recall that any time you run make
hello
or make mario or make cash or may credit
any of the problems that you might have
tackled more recently
you see some cryptic output on the
screen hopefully no red or yellow
error messages but even when all is well
you see this white text which is
indicative of all having been well
and last week we just kind of ignored
this and moved on and immediately did
something like dot slash hello
but today let's actually better
understand what it is that we've been
turning a blind eye to so that
each week as it passes there's less and
less that you don't understand the
entirety of
with respect to what's going on on your
screen so again if i do ls here we'll
see not only hello.c
but also the executable program called
hello that i actually created via make
but look at this output there's some
mention of something called clang here
and then there's a lot of other words or
cryptic phrases
something in computer speak here that
has all of these hyphens in front of
them and it turns out that what make us
doing for us
is it's automating execution of a
command more specifically called
clang clang is actually the compiler
that we alluded to last week a compiler
being a program
that converts source code to machine
code we've actually been using clang
this whole time
but notice that clang requires a bit
more sophistication you have to
understand a bit more about what's going
on in order to use it
so let me go ahead and remove the
program called hello
i'm going to use the rm command that we
saw briefly last time
i'm going to confirm by hitting y and if
i type ls again now hello.c is the only
file that remains well
temporarily let me take away the ability
to use make
and let's now use clang directly clang
is another program installed in cs50 ide
it's a very popular compiler that you
can download onto your own macs and pcs
as well
but to run it is a little different i'm
going to go ahead and say clang
and then the name of the file that i
want to compile
hello.c being this one i'm going to go
ahead and hit enter
and now nothing happens seemingly but
frankly as you've probably gleaned
already when nothing bad seems to happen
that implicitly tends to mean that
something good happened your program
compiled successfully
but curiously if i type ls now you don't
see the program hello you see this weird
file name called a
dot out and this is actually a
historical remnant years ago when humans
would use a compiler to compile their
code
the default file name that every program
was given
was a dot out for assembly output more
on that in a moment but this is kind of
a stupid name for a program it's not at
all descriptive of what it does
so it turns out that programs like clang
can be configured at the command line
the command line again refers to the
blinking prompt where you can type
commands
so indeed i'm going to go ahead and
remove this file now rm
space a dot out and then confirm with y
and now i'm back to where i began with
just hello.c
and let me go ahead now and do something
a little different i'm going to do clang
dash o hello and then
the word hello.c and what i'm doing here
is actually providing
what we're going to start calling a
command lined argument
so these commands like make and rm
sometimes can just be run all by
themselves you just run
type a single word and hit enter but
very often we've seen that they
take inputs in some sense you type make
hello
you type rm hello and the second word
hello in those cases is kind of an
input to the command otherwise now known
as a command line
argument it's an input to the command so
here we have
more command line arguments we've got
the word clang which is the
compiler we're about to run dash o which
it turns out is shorthand notation for
output so please output the following
what do you want to output well the next
word
is hello and then the final word is
hello.c so long story short
this command now more verbose though it
is is saying
run clang output a file called hello and
take as input a file called
hello.c so when i run this command after
hitting enter nothing again seems to
happen but if i type ls
i don't see that stupid default file
name of a.out
now i see the file name hello so this is
how
ultimately clang is helping me compile
my code it's kind of automating all of
those processes
but recall that that's not the only type
of program we ran last week
or wrote last week we rather took code
like this and began to enhance it with
some additional lines so version two of
hello world
actually involved prompting the user for
input using cs50's getstring function
storing the output in a variable called
name
but recall that we also had to add
cs50.h at the top of the file
so let me go ahead and do that let me go
ahead and remove hello
because that's now the old version let
me go in now and start updating my code
here
and go into my hello.c file
include cs50.h now get myself a string
called name but we could call it
anything call the function getstring and
ask
what's your name question mark with a
space at the very end just to create a
gap
and then down here instead of printing
out hello world always
let me print out hello percent s which
is a placeholder recall
and output the person's name so last
week the way we compiled this program
was just make hello
no different from now but this week
suppose i were to instead get rid of
make only because it's sort of
automating steps for me that i now want
to understand in more detail
i could compile this program again with
clang dash o hello
hello.c so just a re-application of that
same
idea of passing in three arguments dasho
hello and hello.c but the catch now
is that i'm actually going to see one of
these red error messages and let's
consider what this is actually saying
there's still going to be a bunch of
cryptic stuff here
but notice as always we're going to see
hopefully something that's a little
familiar so undefined reference to get
string
i don't yet know what an undefined
reference is necessarily
i don't know what a linker command is
but i at least recognize there's
something going on with getstring
and there's a reason for this it turns
out that when using a library whether
it's cs50s library or
others as well it's sometimes not
sufficient only to include the header
file
at the top of your own code sometimes
you additionally have to tell the
computer
where to find the zeros and ones
that someone has written to implement a
function like
getstring so the header file like cs50.h
just tells the compiler that the
function exists
but there's a second mechanism that up
until now has been automated for us
that tells the computer where to find
the actual zeros and ones that
implement the functions in that header
file
so with that said i'm going to need to
actually add another command line
argument to this command
and instead of doing clang dash o hello
hello.c
i'm going to additionally and admittedly
cryptically do dash
l cs50 at the end of this command which
quite simply refers to
link in the cs50 library so link is a
term of art that we'll see what it means
in more detail in just a moment
but this additional final command line
argument tells clang
you already know that a function like
getstring exists
dash lcs50 means when compiling hello.c
make sure to incorporate all of the
machine code from cs50s library
into your program as well in short it's
something you have to do
when you use certain libraries so now
when i hit enter all seems to be well
because nothing bad got printed if i
type
ls i see hello and voila i can do dot
slash hello
type in my name david and voila hello
david
so why didn't we do all of this last
week and frankly we've made no
fundamental progress all we've done is
reveal
what's going on underneath the hood but
i'll claim that frankly compiling your
code by typing out all of these
verbose command line arguments just gets
tedious quickly and so computer
scientists and programmers more
specifically
tend to automate monotonous steps so
what's happening ultimately
with make is that all of this is being
automated for us so when you typed
make hello last week and henceforth
you're welcome to continue using make as
well
notice that it generates this extra long
command
some of which we haven't even talked
about but i do recognize clang
at the beginning i recognize hello.c
here i recognize dash l cs50 here
but notice there's a bunch of other
stuff as well not only the dash oh hello
but also dash lm which refers to a math
library dash
l crypt which refers to a cryptography
or encryption library
in short we the staff have
pre-configured make
to just make sure that when you compile
your code all of the requisite
dependency libraries and so forth are
available to you
without having to worry about all of
these command line arguments so
henceforth
you can certainly compile your code in
this way using clang directly
or you can come back full circle to
where we were last week and just run
make hello
but there's a reason we run make hello
because uh executing all of those steps
manually
tends to just get tedious quickly and so
indeed what we've done here is
compile our code and compiling means
going from source code to machine code
but today
we reveal that there's a little more
indeed going on underneath the hood this
linking that i referred to
and a couple of other steps as well so
it turns out when you compile your code
from source code to machine code there's
a few more steps
that are ultimately involved and when we
say compiling we actually mean these
four steps
and we're not going to dwell on these
kinds of low level details but it's
perhaps enlightening just to see
a brief tour of what's going on when you
start with your source code
and end up trying to produce machine
code so let's consider this this is step
one
that the computer is doing for you when
you compile your code
so step one takes your own source code
that looks a little something like this
and it pre-processes your code top to
bottom left to right and to pre-process
your code essentially means
that it looks for any lines that start
with a hash symbol
so hash include cs50.h hash includes
standardio.h
and what the preprocessing step does is
it's kind of like a find and replace
it notices oh here's a hash include line
let me go ahead
and copy the contents of that file
cs50.h
into your own code similarly when i
encounter hash include
standardio.h let me the so-called
preprocessor
open that file standardio.h and copy
paste the contents of that file
so that what's in the file now looks
more like this
so this is happening automatically you
never have to do this manually
but why is there this pre-processing
step
if you recall our discussion last week
of these
lines of code that tend to go at the top
of your file
does anyone perceive what the
preprocessor is doing for me and why
why do i write code that has these hash
symbols
like include cs50.h and include
standardio.h
but this preprocessor apparently is
automatically
replacing those lines with the actual
contents of those files what are these
things here
in yellow now uh yeah jack what do you
think
is it defining all the functions for you
using your code otherwise the computer
wouldn't know what to do
exactly it's defining all of the
functions in my code so the computer
knows what to do because remember that
we ran into that
sort of annoying bug last week whereby i
was trying to implement a function
called
i think get positive int and recall that
when i implemented that function at the
bottom of my file
the compiler was kind of dumb in that it
didn't realize that it existed because
it was implemented all the way at the
bottom of my file
so to jack's point by putting a mention
of this
function a hint if you will at the very
top it's like training the compiler
to know in advance that i don't know how
it's implemented yet but i know
getstring is going to exist i don't know
how it's implemented yet but i know
printf
is going to exist so these header files
that we've been including for the past
week
essentially contain all of the
prototypes
that is all of the hints for all the
functions that exist in the library
so that your code when compiled know
from the top
down that those functions will indeed
exist
so the preprocessor just saves us the
trouble of having to copy and paste all
of these prototypes if you will all of
these hints
ourselves so what happens after that
step there
what comes next well there might very
well be other header files there might
very well be other contents in those
files but for now let's just assume that
only in there
is the prototype so now compiling
actually has a more precise meaning that
we'll define today
to compile your code now means to take
this c
code and to convert it from source code
here
to another type of source code here now
this is probably going to be the most
cryptic stuff we ever see and this is
not code you need to understand
but what's on the screen here is what's
called assembly code
so long story short there's a lot of
different computers in the world and
specifically
there's a lot of different types of cpus
in the world
central processing units the brains of a
computer and a cpu
understands certain commands and those
commands
tend to be expressed in this language
called assembly code now i honestly
don't really understand most of this
myself it's certainly been a while even
since i thought hard about assembly code
but if i highlight
a few operative characters here notice
that there's mention of main
getstring and printf so this is sort of
like a lower level
implementation of main of getstring and
printf
in a different language called assembly
so you write the c code
the computer though converts it to a
more computer computer-friendly language
called assembly code and decades ago
humans wrote this stuff humans wrote
assembly code
but nowadays we have c and nowadays we
have languages like python more on that
in a few weeks that are just more
user-friendly even if it didn't feel
like that this past week
assembly code is a little closer to what
the computer itself understands
but there's still another step there's
this step called assembling and again
all of this is happening when you simply
run
make and in turn this command clang to
assemble your code means to take this
assembly code and
finally convert it to machine code zeros
and ones
so you write the source code the
compiler assembles it into assembly code
then it compiles it into assembly code
then it assembles it into
machine code until we have the actual
zeros and ones
but there's actually one final step just
because your code that you wrote has
been converted into zeros and ones
it still needs to be linked in with the
zeros and ones that cs50 wrote and that
the designers of the c
language wrote years ago when
implementing the cs50 library in our
case
and the printf function in their case so
this is to say that when you have code
like this
that's not only including the prototypes
for functions like getstring and printf
at the very top
these lines here in yellow are what are
ultimately converted into
uh zeros and ones we now have to combine
those zeros and ones with the zeros and
ones from
cs50.c which the staff wrote some time
ago
and even a file called standardio.c
which the designers of c
wrote years ago and technically it might
be called something different underneath
the hood
but there's really three files that are
getting combined when you write your
program
the first i just claimed once it's uh
one it's it's pre-processed and compiled
and assembled
it's then in this form of all zeros and
ones somewhere on the cs50 ide there's a
whole bunch of zeros and ones
representing cs50.c
somewhere in cs50 ide there's another
file representing the zeros and ones for
standardio.c
so this final fourth step aka linking
just takes all of my zeros and ones all
of cs50 zeros and ones all of printf's
zeros and ones
and links them all together into one big
blob if you will
that collectively represent your program
hello
so my god like that's quite a mouthful
and so many steps and none of the steps
have i described
are really germane to you implementing
mario's pyramid or
cash or credit because what we've really
been doing over the past week is taking
all four of these fairly low level
sophisticated concepts
and if you will abstracting them away so
that we just refer to this whole process
as compiling so even though yes
technically compiling is just one of the
four steps
what a programmer typically does when
saying compiling
is there just with a wave of the hand
referring to all of those lower level
details
but it's stan but it is the case that
there's multiple steps happening
underneath the hood and this is what
make an intern clang are doing for you
automating this process of going from
source code to assembly code
to machine code and then linking it all
together with any libraries
you might have used so no longer take
for granted what's happening hopefully
that offers you a glimpse
a bit more of what's actually happening
when you compile your own code
well let me pause there because that's
quite a mouthful
and see if there's any questions on
pre-processing
compiling or assembling
or linking aka compiling
and again we won't dwell at this low
level we'll tend to now just abstract
this all away if we can sort of agree
that okay
yes there's those steps but what's
really important is the whole process
not the minutia sophia
i had a question about with the first
step
when we're replacing all the information
at the top
um is that information contained within
the ide or
where do we are there files saved
somewhere in that id like where it's
getting all this information from
yeah really good question where all
these files coming from so yes when you
are using cs50 ide or frankly if you're
using your own mac
or your own pc and you have
pre-installed a compiler into your mac
or pc just like we have into cs50 ide
what you get is a whole bunch of dot h
files somewhere on the computer system
you might also have a whole bunch of dot
c files or compiled versions thereof
somewhere on the system so yes when you
download and install
a compiler you are getting all of these
libraries added for you and we
pre-installed an additional library
called cs50s library that additionally
comes with its own dot
h file and its own machine code as well
so all of those files are somewhere in
cs50 ide or equivalently in your own mac
or pc if you're working locally
and the compiler clang in this case just
knows how to find that
because one of the steps involved in
installing your own compiler is making
sure it's configured to know
per sophia's question where all those
files are
uh uh uh basically i'm sorry if i'm
mispronouncing it
basley so uh whenever we're uh compiling
hello for example
is the uh compiler also compiling for
example cs50 or does cs50 already exist
in machine code somewhere
beneath yeah really good question too so
i was kind of skirting this part of
sofia's question because
technically speaking probably cs50.c
is not installed on the system and
technically standardio.c
is probably not installed in the system
y it just doesn't need to be it would be
kind of inefficient that is slow
if every time you compiled your own
program you had additionally compiled
cs50s program and standard ios program
and so forth
so it actually stands to reason that
what computers typically do is they
pre-compile
all of those library files for you so
that more efficiently they can just be
linked in and you don't have to keep
pre-processing compiling and assembling
third-party code you only perform those
steps on your own code and then link
everything together and indeed that's
the case
uh it's all done in advance iris
question from you um when we like
replace the header files with
prototypes are we only replacing it with
the prototypes that get used or
like are all the prototypes technically
like substitute yeah so i was kind of
sweeping that detail under the rug with
my
dot dot there's a whole lot of other
stuff in those files you're getting the
entire contents of those files
even if the only thing you need is the
prototype
but and this is why i alluded to the
fact too that technically there probably
isn't a standard io.c file because there
would be so much stuff in it
there's probably not just one standard
io.h file with everything in it there's
probably some smaller files that get
magically included as well
but yes there is man there are many more
lines of code in those files
but that's okay once your computer your
compiler is only going to use the lines
that it actually cares about
good question all right so with that
said
this past week undoubtedly was a bit
frustrating in some ways because you
probably ran into problems you ran into
bugs mistakes in your own code
you probably saw one or more yellow or
red error messages and you might have
struggled a little bit just to get your
code to compile and again
that's normal that will go away over
time but honestly whenever i write c
uh let's say 20 of the time i still have
a compilation error let alone logical
errors
in my own code so this is just part of
the experience of writing code humans
make mistakes in all forms of life and
that's ever more true in the context of
code
where again per our first two weeks
precision is important as is correctness
and it's hard sometimes
to achieve both of those goals so let's
consider now
how you might be more empowered to debug
your own code that is
find problems in your own code and this
word actually has some etymology this
isn't necessarily the first bug
but perhaps the most famous bug is this
one pictured here
uh from the research notebook of uh
grace hopper a famous computer scientist
who had discovered that there were some
problems with the harvard mark
ii computer a very famous computer
nowadays that actually
lives over soon in the new engineering
school on campus used to live in the
science center
the computer was having problems and
sure enough when the engineers took a
look
inside of this big mainframe computer
there was actually a bug
pictured here and taped to grace
hopper's notebook so this wasn't
necessarily the first use of the term
bug
but it is a very well known example of
an actual bug in an actual computer
nowadays we speak a little more
metaphorically that a bug is just a
mistake
in one's program and we did give you a
few tools last week
for troubleshooting bugs help 50 allows
you to better understand some of the
cryptic error messages and that's just
because the staff wrote this program
that analyze the problem you're having
and we try to translate it to just more
human friendly speak
we saw a tool called style 50 which
helps you not with your correctness
but just with the aesthetics of your
code helping you better indent things
and add white space that is blank lines
or space characters
so it's a little more user friendly to
the human to read and then check
50 which of course the staff write so
that we can give you immediate feedback
on whether or not your code is correct
per
the problem sets or the lab
specification but there's some other
tools that you should have
in your toolkit and we'll give those to
you today and one frankly is sort of
this universal debugging tool
just called in the context of c printf
so printf of course is just this
function that prints stuff out onto the
screen but that
in and of itself is a wonderfully
powerful tool
via which you can chase down problems in
your code and even after we
leave c in a few weeks and introduce
python in other languages
almost every programming language out
there has some form of printf maybe it's
called print maybe it's called
say as it was in scratch but some
ability to display information
or present information to a human so
let's try to use
this primitive this notion of printf to
chase down a bug in one's code so let me
go ahead and deliberately write
a buggy program i'm going to even call
the file
buggy buggy0.c and at the top of this
file i'm going to go ahead and
include uh standardio.h no need for the
cs50 library for this one
and then i'm going to do int main void
which we saw last week and we'll explain
in more detail today
and then i'm going to give myself a
quick loop i just want to go ahead and
print out
oh i don't know like 10 hashes on the
screen so i want to print like a
vertical column kind of like one of
those screenshots from super mario
brothers
not a pyramid just a single column of
hashes uh and 10 of them so i'm going to
do something like
int i equals 0 because i feel like i
learned in class that i generally should
start counting from 0.
then i'm going to have my condition in
this for loop and i want to do this 10
times so i'm going to do it less than or
equal to 10.
then i'm going to go ahead and have my
increment which quite simply can be
expressed as i plus plus
and then inside this loop i'm just going
to go ahead and print out a single hash
followed by a new line i'm going to save
the program
i'm going to compile it with clang dash
o
buggy zero buggy zero i mean no you
don't have to use clang manually in this
way it's a lot
simpler to just abstract that away
that's not a command
to abstract that away and run make buggy
zero and make will take care of the
process of invoking
clang for you i'm going to go ahead and
run it seems to be compiling
successfully so no need for help 50.
it's already pretty well styled in fact
if i run style 50 on this
buggy zero i don't have any comments yet
but at least it looks very nicely
indented so i think i'm okay with that
but let me add that comment and do uh
print 10 hashes just to remind myself of
my goal
and now let me go ahead and run this dot
slash buggy zero
enter and i see okay good one two three
four five
six seven eight nine ten eleven
i think all right so it's a stupid bug
and maybe it's jumped out obviously to
some of you but maybe it's a little more
subtle to others of you
but where do you begin suppose i were to
run check 50 and check
50 were to say nope you printed out 11
hashes instead of 10
but my code looks right to me at least
at first glance well how can i go about
debugging this or solving this well
again printf is your friend
if you want to understand more about
your own program use printf to
temporarily
print more information to the screen not
that we want in the final version not
that your tf wants to see
but that you the programmer can
temporarily see so before i print this
hash
let me print something a little more
pedantic like this i
is now percent i backslash n
so i literally want to know just for my
own
mental math what is the value of i at
this point before i print that hash
now i'm going to go ahead and paste in
the value of i so i'm using percent i as
a placeholder
i'm plugging in the value of the
variable i i'm going to save my code now
i'm going to recompile it with make
buggy zero and i'm going to rerun it now
and let me go ahead and increase the
size of my window just so we can focus
now
on the output and i'm going to go ahead
and run dot slash
buggy zero enter okay so now i see not
only my output but also co-mingled with
that output some
diagnostic output if you will some
debugging output and it's just more
pedantically telling me i is now zero
i is now one i is now two dot dot dot i
is now nine i is now
ten okay i don't hate the fact that i is
ten
but i'm not loving the fact that if i
started at 0 and printed a hash
and i'm hitting 10 and printing another
hash well obviously there's my problem
so it might not have been
all that much more obvious than looking
at the code itself but by using printf
you can just be a lot more clear to
yourself what's going on
so if now i see okay well if i start at
0 i have to go up to 10
i could change my code to do this to be
less than 10 i could leave that alone
and go from 1 through 10
but again programmer convention would be
to go from zero up to ten
so i think i'm good now and in fact now
i'll go ahead and recompile this
make buggy zero let me go ahead and
increase the size of the window again
just so i can temporarily see this
and do dot slash buggy zero okay i start
now at zero
one two dot dot dot now i stop at nine
and that of course gives me ten hashes
so again i don't need this in the final
output and i'm gonna go ahead and delete
this now as temporary output
but again having those instincts if you
don't quite understand why your code is
compiling but not running properly
and you want to better see what the
computer is clearly seeing its mind's
eye
use printf to just tell yourself what
the value of some variable or variables
are anywhere in your code
that you want to see a little more
detail all right let me pause
for just a moment to see if there's any
questions on this technique of just
using
printf to begin to debug your code
and to see the values of variables in a
way that's a little more
explicit
no all right well let me propose
an even more powerful tool that
admittedly takes a little getting used
to but this is kind of one of those
lessons
uh trust me if you will that if you
spend a few more minutes maybe even an
hour so this week
learning the following tool you will
save yourself hours plural maybe even
tens of hours
over the course of the next many weeks
because this tool can help you truly see
what's going on inside of your code so
this tool
we're going to add to the list today is
called debug 50. and while this one does
end with 50 implying that it's a cs50
tool it's built on top of an industry
standard tool
known as gdb the gnu debugger that's a
standard tool that a lot of different
computer systems use to provide you with
the ability
to debug your code in a more
sophisticated way than
just using printf alone so let's go
ahead and do this let me go back to the
buggy version of this program
which recall had me going from 0 through
10 which was too many steps
a moment ago i proposed that we just use
printf to see the value of i
but frankly the bigger our programs get
the more complicated they get
the more output they need to have on the
screen it's just going to get
very messy quickly if you're printing
out stuff that shouldn't be there right
think back to mario mario's pyramid
is this sort of graphical output and it
would very quickly get ugly and kind of
hard to understand
your pyramid if you're co-mingling that
pyramid with actual textual output from
printf as well
so debug 50 and in turn a debugger in
any language
is a tool that allows you to run your
code step by step
and look inside of variables
and other pieces of memory inside of the
computer
while your program is running right now
pretty much every program we run
takes like a split second to run that's
way too fast for me the human to wrap my
mind around what's going on
step by step a debugger allows you to
run your program but much more slowly
step by step so you can see what's going
on so i'm going to go ahead now and run
debug 50 dot slash hello
so no sorry debug 50 dot slash
buggy zero so i write debug 50 first a
space and then dot slash in the name of
the program that's already compiled
that i want to debug so i'm going to go
ahead and hit enter
and notice that oh it was smart it
noticed that i changed my code and i did
a moment ago i reverted it back to the
buggy version so let me fix this
make buggy zero all right no errors now
let me go ahead and run debug 50 again
and if you haven't noticed this already
sometimes i seem to type crazy fast i'm
not necessarily typing that fast i'm
going through my history in cs50 ide
using your arrow keys up and down you
can scroll back in time
for all of the commands you've typed
over the past few minutes or hours or
even days
and this will just start to save you
keystrokes so i'm going to go ahead and
knit up
and now i don't have to bother typing
this whole command again it's a helpful
way to just save time
i'm going to go ahead now and hit enter
and now notice
this error message i haven't set any
break points set at least one breakpoint
by clicking to the left of a line number
and then rerun debug 50.
well what's going on here well debug 50
needs me to tell the computer in advance
at what line i want to break
into and step through step by step so
i can do that i'm going to go to the
side of the file here as it says
and you know what the first interesting
file uh first interesting line is this
one here line six
so i clicked in the so-called gutter the
left-hand side of the screen
on line six and that automatically put a
red dot there like a stop sign
now one last time i'm gonna go ahead and
run debug 50 dot slash buggy zero and
hit enter
and now notice this fancy new panel
opens up on the right hand side and it's
going to look a little cryptic at first
but let's consider what has changed on
the screen notice now that highlighted
in this sort of off-yellow color
is line six and that's because what
debug 50 is doing is it's running my
program but it has paused
execution on line six so it's done
everything from line one through five
but now it's waiting for me on line six
and what's interesting over
here is this let me zoom in on this
window over here
and there's a lot going on here
admittedly but let's focus for just a
moment
not on watch expressions not on call
stack
but only on local variables and notice i
have a variable called i whose initial
value
is zero and it's of type int now this is
kind of interesting because watch what i
can do via these icons up here
i can click on this step over line and
start to step
through my code line by line so let me
go ahead and zoom out
let me go ahead and click step over and
watch what happens to the yellow
highlighting
it moves down to the next line but
notice if i zoom in again up here
the value of i has not changed now let
me go ahead and step over again
and notice the yellow highlighting
doubles back that makes sense because
i'm in a loop so it should be going back
and forth back and forth
but what next happens in a loop every
time you go back to the beginning of the
loop remember that your incrementation
happens like the i
plus plus so watch now closely in the
top right hand corner
when i click step over now notice that
the value of i
in my debugger has just been changed to
1.
so i didn't have to use printf i didn't
have to mess up the output of my screen
i can literally see in this gui this
graphical user interface on the right
hand side
what the value of i is now if i just
start clicking a little more quickly
notice that as the loop is executing
again and again
the value of i keeps getting updated and
you know what i bet
even though we started at zero if i do
this enough times
i will see that the value is 10 now
thereby giving me
another printf at the bottom thereby
explaining the 11
total hashes that i saw so i haven't
gotten any new information here
but notice i've gotten unperturbed
information i've not
messily and sort of sloppily printed out
all of these printf statements on the
screen
i'm just kind of watching a little more
methodically what's happening to the
state of my variable
over on the the top right there all
right let me pause here too
to see if there's any questions on what
this debugger does
again you compile your code you run
debug 50 on your code but only after
setting a so-called
break point where you decide in advance
where do you want to pause execution of
your code
even though here i did it pretty much at
the beginning of my program for bigger
programs it's going to be super
convenient to be able to pause like
halfway through your code
and not have to go through the whole
thing peter question
uh about the debugger uh
what's the difference between step over
and step into and step
out and really good question let me come
back to that in just a moment because
we'll do one
other example where step into and step
out actually
are germaine but before we do that any
other questions about debug 50
before we reveal what step into and step
over do for us
as well
all right well let's take peter's
question right there let me go ahead and
now
and get out of the debugger and honestly
i don't see an obvious way to get out of
the debugger at the moment
but ctrl c is your new friend today too
pretty much
any time you lose control of a program
because the debugger's running and
you've lost
interest in it or maybe last week you
wrote a program that has an infinite
loop that just keeps going and going and
going
ctrl c will break out of that program
but let's now write quickly another
program that this time has a second
function and we'll see one
other feature of the debugger today i'm
going to go ahead and create a new file
now
called buggy1.c again it's going to be
deliberately flawed
but i'm going to first going to go ahead
and include cs50.h this time
and i'm going to include standardio.h
i'm going to do int main void
and i'm going to go ahead and do the
following give myself a variable called
i
and i'm going to try to get a negative
int by calling a function called get
negative int
and then quite simply i'm going to print
out this value percent i
backslash n i semicolon now there's only
one problem
get negative int does not exist so like
last week where we implemented get
positive in
this week i'll implement get negative
int but i'm going to do it incorrectly
at first
now get negative int as the name implies
needs to return an integer and even
though we only spent
brief time on this last week recall that
you can specify the output of a function
a custom function that you wrote by
putting its so-called return value first
on this line and then you can put the
name of the function like get negative
int
and then in parentheses you can put the
input to the function but if it takes no
input
you can literally write the word void
which is a term of art that just means
nothing goes here i'm going to go ahead
now and implement get negative int and
frankly i think it's going to be pretty
similar to last week but my memory is a
little hazy so again
it will be deliberately flawed but i'm
going to go ahead and declare a variable
called n then i'm going to do the
following
i'm going to set n equal to get int and
i'm just going to explicitly ask the
user for
negative integer followed by a space
and then i'm going to keep doing this
while n is less than zero
and then at the very last line i'm going
to return
n so again i claim that this function
will get me a negative in
from the user and it's going to keep
doing it again and again until the user
cooperates however
there is a bug and there's a couple of
bugs in fact
right now let me go ahead and make a
deliberate mistake make buggy
one enter and i see a whole bunch of
errors here i could use help 50 on this
but based on last week does anyone
recall what the error here might be
error implicit declaration of function
get negative
int is invalid in c99 so i don't know
all of that but implicit declaration of
function
is something you're going to start to
see more often if you make this mistake
anyone recall what this means and what
the fix is without resorting to
help50 yeah uh
jasmine what do you think so basically
since you declared it after
you already used it in your code it
doesn't know what to read that ads when
it's processing it so you have to move
like the first line
above when you actually start the code
perfect and this is the only time
i will claim that copy paste is
acceptable and encouraged
i'm going to copy the very first line
only of that function
and as javascript proposed i'm going to
paste it at the very top of the file
thereby giving myself a hint otherwise
known as a prototype so i'll even label
it as such to remind myself why it's
there
prototype of that function and here i'm
going to go ahead and get
negative integer from user
and then this function is is left
as written so i now have this prototype
at the very top of my file which i think
will indeed get rid of this error let me
do a make
buggy one again now i see that it indeed
compiled okay but when i run it now dot
slash buggy one
let me go ahead and input a negative
integer negative one
negative two negative three i feel like
the function should be happy with this
and it's obviously not so there's a bug
i'm going to go ahead and hit ctrl c to
get out of my program because like
otherwise it would run potentially
forever and now i'm going to use debug
50. but debug 50 just got really
interesting to peter's question earlier
because now i have things i can step
into i'm not writing all of my code in
main
there's this other function now called
get negative in so let's see what
happens now
let me go ahead and set a break point on
like the first interesting line of code
line 10
and it's interesting only in the sense
that everything else is kind of
boilerplate at this point you just have
to do it
to get your program started i'm going to
now go down here
and i'm going to do debug 50 dot slash
buggy one
and in a moment it's going to open up
that sidebar
and i'm going to focus now not only on
local variables
like i did before notice that i is again
equal to 0 here by default
but i'm also going to reveal this my
option here call stack
so call stack is a fancy way of
referring to
all of the functions that your program
at this point in time
has executed and not yet returned from
so
right now there's only one thing on the
call stack because the only function
that is currently
executing is of course main because why
i set a break point at line 10 which is
by definition inside of main
but does peter's question earlier i feel
like
lines 10 and 11 frankly they look pretty
correct right it's hard at this point to
have screwed up lines 10 and 11
except syntactically because i'm getting
a negative int i'm storing it in i
and then i'm printing out the value of i
on those two lines
but what if instead i'm curious that
about
get negative in i feel like the bug
logically it's got to be in there
because that's the harder code that i
wrote
notice this time instead of clicking
step over
let me go ahead and click on step into
which is one of the buttons peter
alluded to and when i click step
into notice that you sort of go down the
rabbit hole
and debug 50 jumps into the function
get negative ant and it focuses on the
first interesting line of code so
do in and of itself really isn't that
interesting int n isn't that interesting
because it's not assigning a value to it
even yet
the first juicy line of code seems to be
line 19 and that's why the debugger has
jumped to that line
now n equals get int feels pretty
correct it's hard to misuse get int but
notice now on the right hand side
what has happened under call stack you
now see
two things not only main but also get
negative int and a stack it's like a
stack of trays in a cafeteria
the first tray at the bottom is like
main the second tray
on the stack in the cafeteria is now get
negative int
and what's cool about this is that
notice that right now
i can see my local variables n and
that's indeed the variable i used so i
no longer see i
i see n because i'm into the get
negative in function
and now if i keep clicking step over
again
and again after typing in a number let
me type in negative one here
now notice on the top right of the
screen you can see in the debugger that
n
equals negative one i'm going to now go
ahead and click step
over and i think i'm going to end up in
line 22.
if the human has typed in a negative
integer like negative one
obviously that's negative let's proceed
to line 22
but watch what happens when i click step
over
it actually seems to be going back
to the do loop again and again and again
as it will if i keep providing negative
integers
so my logic then should be well okay if
n is negative one
but my loop is still running like what
should your logical takeaway here be
if n is negative one and that is by
definition a negative integer
but my loop is still running like what
could be your
diagnostic conclusion if the debugger is
essentially revealing this hint to you
n is negative one but the loop is still
going omar
what would you conclude either the
condition is wrong maybe some sort of
boolean logic
could be flawed perfect so obviously
either the condition is wrong or there's
something wrong with my boolean logic
and boolean logic just refers to true or
false so somewhere
i'm saying true instead of false or i'm
saying false instead of true
and frankly the only place where i have
code that's going to make this loop go
again and again
must logically be on line 21. so even if
you're not quite sure how to fix it yet
just by deduction you should realize
that okay negative one is what's in the
variable but that's not good enough the
loop is still going i must have screwed
up the loop and indeed
let me just now call it out line 21 is
indeed the source of the bug
so we've isolated it out of 23 lines
we've at least found the one line where
i know the
the solution has to be what's the
solution how do i fix the logic now
thanks to the debugger having sort of
led me
down this road how do i fix
line 21 here what's the fix
would you propose uh yeah jacob
you would have to change it from while n
is less than zero to while n is greater
than zero
exactly so instead of and less than 0 i
want to say n
greater than 0 and i think slight
clarification i think i want to include
0 here because 0 is not negative and if
i want a negative n
i think what i'm probably going to want
to say is while n is greater than or
equal to zero
keep doing the loop so i very
understandably sort of just inverted the
logic no big deal i'm thinking negatives
and i did less than but
the fix is easy the point is the
debugger led you to this point now those
of you who have programmed before
probably saw the bug jumping out at you
those of you who haven't programmed
before
probably would sometime would have
figured out what the bug was because out
of 23 lines it's got to be
one of those but as our programs get
more sophisticated and
we start writing more lines of code
debug 50 and debuggers in general will
be your friend and i realize that
this is easier said than done because at
first when using a debugger you're going
to feel like ah this is just i'm just
going to use printf
i'm just going to sort of fight through
this because there's a bit of a learning
curve
you will gain back that time and more
by just using a debugger as your first
instinct when chasing down
problems like this all right
so that's it for debug 50. a new tool in
your tool kit in addition to printf
but debug 50 is hands down the more
powerful of the two
now some of you have wondered over the
past like couple of weeks why there's
this little rubber duck here
and there actually is a reason for this
too and there's one final debugging
technique that in all seriousness we'll
introduce you today too
known as rubber duck debugging and you
can google this there's a whole
wikipedia article about it
uh and this is kind of a thing in
computer science circles for computer
scientists or programmers to have like
rubber ducks on their desk
and the point here is that sometimes
when trying to understand
what is wrong in your code it helps to
just talk it through and in an ideal
world
we would just talk to our our colleague
or our partner on some project
and just in hearing yourself vocalize
what it is your code
is supposed to very often that
proverbial light bulb goes off and
you're like oh wait a minute never mind
i got it
just because you heard yourself speaking
illogically when you intended something
actual logical
now we don't often all have uh
colleagues or partners or friends with
whom we're working on a project with and
we don't often have family members or
friends who want to hear about our code
of all things
and so a wonderful proxy for that
conversant partner would be
literally a rubber duck and so here in
healthier times we would be giving all
of you rubber ducks uh
here on stage we brought a larger one
for us all to share
if you've noticed in some of the wide
shots on camera uh there's a duck who's
been watching this whole time so that
anytime i screw up i literally have
someone i can sort of
talk to if non-verbally in this case but
we can't emphasize enough that in
addition to printf
in addition to the more sophisticated
debug 50 talking through your problems
with code
is a wonderfully valuable thing and if
your friends or family are willing to
hear about some low-level code you're
writing
and some bug you're trying to solve
great but in the absence of that talk to
a stuffed animal in your room
talk to an actual rubber duck if you
have one talk even aloud or think a lot
it's just a wonderful
compelling habit to get into because
just in hearing yourself vocalize what
you think is logical
will the illogical very often jump out
at you
instead all right so with that said
that's been a lot let's go ahead here
and take a five minute break give
everyone a bit of a breather and when we
come back we'll take a look now at some
of the more powerful features of c now
that we can trust that we can solve any
problems
with all of these new tools so we'll be
back in five
all right we are back so let's take a
look underneath the
hood so to speak of a computer because
as fancy as these devices are and as
powerful as they seem
they're relatively simple in their
capabilities and what they can actually
do
and let's reveal as much by way of last
week's discussion of type so recall that
c
supports different data types so we saw
char and string
and int and so forth so to recap we had
all of these well it turns out
that each of these data types is defined
on a typical computer system
is taking up a fixed amount of space
and it depends on the computer whether
it's mac or pc or old or new just how
much space is used
typically by these data types but on
cs50 ide the sizes of all of these types
are as follows a bool
true or false uses just one bite now
that's actually a little wasteful
because one bite is eight bits and gosh
like for a bull you should only need one
bit
you can't work at the single bit level
easily
in c um and so we just typically spend
one whole bite on a bull
char is going to be one bite as well and
that might sound familiar because last
week when we talked about ascii
we proposed that the total number of
possible characters you can represent
with a char was 256
because of eight bits and two to the
eighth power so one char
is one byte and that's fixed in c no
matter what
then there were all of these other data
types there was float which is a real
number with a decimal point
that happens to use four bytes a double
is also a real number with a decimal
point but it uses eight bytes which
gives you even more
precision you can have more significant
digits after the decimal point for
instance
ints we've used a bunch those are four
bytes typically
a long is twice as big and that just
allows you to represent an even bigger
number and some of you might have done
that exactly
on credit when storing a whole credit
card number strings for now
are a variable number of bytes it could
be a short string of text a long string
of text a whole paragraph
so that's going to vary so we'll come
back to this notion of string
next time but today focus on just these
primitive types if you will
and here is a picture of what is inside
of your computer so this is a piece of
memory or ram
random access memory and it might be a
little smaller it might be a little
bigger depending on whether it's a
laptop or desktop or phone or the like
but it's in memory or ram that programs
are stored
while they're running and it's where
files are stored when they are
open so typically if you save install
programs or save files
those are saved on what's generally
called your hard drive or hard disk or
solid state disk or cd
or some other physical medium and that
the update of which is that they don't
require electricity
to store your data long term ram is
different it's volatile so to speak but
it's much
faster than a hard disk or a solid state
disk even it's much faster because it's
purely electronic
and indeed there are no moving parts
it's purely electronic as pictured here
and so with ram you have the ability to
open
files and run programs more quickly
because when you double-click a program
to run it
or you open a file in order to view or
edit it it's stored temporarily in ram
and long story short if your battery
laptops if your laptop battery has ever
died or your computer's gotten unplugged
or your phone dies
the reason that you and i tend to lose
data the paragraph that you just wrote
in the essay that you hadn't yet
saved is because ram memory is volatile
that is it requires electricity to
continue powering it
but for our purposes we're only going to
focus on ram
not so much long-term disk space yet
because when you're running a program
in c it is indeed by definition running
in your computer's memory
but the funny thing about something as
simple as this picture is that each of
these black rectangles is kind of a chip
and in those chips are stored all of the
zeros and ones the little switches that
we alluded to in week zero so let's
focus it on and just zoom in on just one
of these chips
now it stands to reason that i don't
know how big this this stick of ram is
maybe it's one gigabyte
a billion bytes maybe it's four
gigabytes maybe it's even smaller or
bigger
there's some number of bytes represented
physically by this hardware so
if we zoom in further let me propose
that all right i don't know how many
bytes are here but
if there's some number of bytes whether
it's a billion or two billion or fewer
or more
it stands to reason that we could just
number all of these bytes we could sort
of think of this physical
device this memory as just being a grid
top to bottom left to right and each of
the squares i've just overlaid on this
physical device
might represent an individual byte and
again in reality maybe there's more of
them maybe there's fewer of them but it
stands for reason no matter how many
there
are we can think of each of these as
having a location like this is the first
byte second byte third byte and so forth
well what does it mean then for a char
to take up one byte
that means that if your computer's
memory is running a program maybe that
you wrote or i wrote that's using a char
variable somewhere in it the char you're
storing in that variable may very well
be stored in the top left-hand corner
physically
of this piece of ram maybe it's there
maybe it's elsewhere but it's just one
physical square if you're storing
something like an
int which takes up four bytes well that
frankly might take up
all four squares along the top there or
somewhere else if you're using a long
that's going to take up twice as much
space so representing an even bigger
number in your computer's memory
is going to require that you use all of
the zeros and ones
comprising these uh eight bytes instead
but let's now move away from physical
hardware let's abstract it away if you
will and just now start to think of our
memory
as just this grid and technically it's
not a two dimensional structure i could
just as easily
draw all of these bytes from left to
right i could just fit fewer of them on
the screen so we'll take the physical
metaphor a bit further
and just think of our computer's memory
as this grid this grid of bytes
and those bytes are each eight bits
those bits are just zeros and ones so
what we've really done is zoom in
metaphorically on our computer's memory
to start thinking about
where things are going to end up in
memory when you double click on a
program on your mac or pc or
in cs50 ide when you do dot slash hello
or dot slash buggy zero or buggy one
it's these bytes in your computer's
memory that are filled with all of your
variables values
so let's consider an example here
suppose i had written some code
that involved declaring three scores
maybe it's a class that's got like
three tests and you want to average the
use uh the student's score
acros the student's grade across all
three of those tests well let's go ahead
and write a quick program that does
exactly this
in cs50 ide i'm going to create a
program called scores.c
and in scores.c i'm going to go ahead
and include
standardio.h i'm going to then do my int
main void as usual
and then inside of here i'm going to
keep it very simple i'm going to give
myself one
int called one and just to be a little
uh playful i'm going to set it equal to
72 like last week
i'm going to give myself a second score
and set it equal to 73 and then a third
score
call whose value is going to be 33 and
then let me go ahead and print out
the average of those three values by
plugging in
a placeholder for a floating point value
right if you do if you add
three integers together and divide them
by three i may very well get a fraction
or a real number with the decimal point
so i'm going to use percent f
instead of percent i because i don't
want to truncate someone's grade
otherwise if they have like a 99.9
they're not being rounded up to 100
they're going to get the 99 because of
truncation as we discussed last week
so how do i do now the math of an
average well it's pretty straightforward
score one plus score two plus score
three in parentheses
just like in math divided by three
semicolon
let me save that file let me do make
scores at the bottom
again we're not going to use clang
manually no need to because it's a lot
easier to run make
but i did mess up here format specifies
type double
but the argument has type in so i don't
quite understand that
but it's drawing my attention to the
percent f and the fact that my math
looks like this so any thoughts here
i don't think printf is going to help me
here because i'm the bug is within the
printf line
i don't think that debug 50 is going to
really help me here because i already
know what line of
code the bug is in this feels like an
opportunity to like
talk to the physical duck or some other
inanimate object
or we can perhaps think about what
errors we ran into even
last week arpan
what do you think i think it's because
all right it's telling you this because
it's
it's receiving a all the values are in
integer type
but you are telling it to be in floyd
indeed so score one score two score
three are all integers
and the number three is literally an
integer and so
this time the compiler is smart enough
to realize wait a minute you're trying
to
coerce an integer result into a floating
point value but you haven't done any
floating point arithmetic if you will
so you know what there's a few ways to
fix this last week recall
we proposed that you could use a cast
and you could explicitly cast
one or more of those values to a float
so i could do this for instance
or i could cast all of these to floats
or one of these to floats there's many
different possibilities but frankly the
simplest fix
is just to divide for instance by 3.0 i
can avoid some of the the headaches of
casting from one to another by just
making sure that there's at least one
floating point value involved
in this arithmetic so now let me
recompile scores
this time it compiles okay let me do dot
slash scores and voila
my average isn't so high 59.3333
right so what is actually going on
inside of the computer
in irrespective of the floating point
arithmetic which was again
a topic of last week well let's consider
these three variables score one score
two score three
where are they actually being stored in
the computer's memory well let's
consider that grid again and again i'm
going to start at top left for
convenience
but technically speaking and we'll see
this down the road your computer's
memory is just like this big canvas
and values can end up in all different
places but for today we'll keep it clean
the first variable score one i claim is
going to be here top
left for simplicity but what's important
about where
score one that is 72 is being stored
is it's come taking up four of these
boxes each of these boxes recall
represents one byte
and an integer recall and cs50 ide is
four bytes
therefore i have used four bytes of
space to represent the number 72.
the number 73 in score 2 similarly it's
gonna take up four boxes
as is score three gonna take up four
boxes as well
but what's really going on underneath
the hood here well if each of these
squares represents a byte and each of
those bytes is eight
bits and a bit is just a zero or one
what's really going underneath the hood
is something like this
somehow this electronic memory is
storing electricity in just the right
way
so that it's storing this pattern of
zeros and ones aka
72 and decimal this pattern of zeros and
ones aka
73 in decimal this pattern of zeros and
33 in decimal but again we don't have to
keep thinking about or dwelling on the
binary level but this is only to say
that
everything we've discussed thus far is
coming together now in this one picture
because the computer is just storing
these patterns for us and we are
allocating space now thanks to our
programming language
via code like this but this code
correct though it may be indeed 59.33333
and so forth was my average if my test
scores were 72 73 and 33
but i feel like there's an opportunity
for better design here
so not just correctness not just style
recall that design is this other
metric of code quality and it's a little
more subjective
and it's a little more subject to debate
among reasonable people
but i don't really love what i was doing
with this
naming scheme and in fact if we look at
the code there really wasn't much more
to my program than these three lines
i worry this program isn't particularly
well designed
what rubs you the wrong way perhaps
about
those three lines of code what could be
better
and even if you don't know the solution
especially if you've never programmed
before
what kind of smells about those three
lines this is actually a term of our
code smell it's like
something not loving that for some
reason if you can't put your finger on
it it's not the best design the code
smells
what's smelly if you will about score
one score two score three ryan what do
you think
if you're doing an average calculation
you don't need to add them up all
together in the code you can add them up
beforehand and store it as one variable
absolutely if i'm computing the average
i don't need to keep all three around i
can just keep a sum and divide the whole
sum by the total number i like that
that instinct what else might you not
like
about the design of this code now score
one score two score three
score one score two score three might
there be opportunities still for
improvement
i feel like anytime you start to see
this repetition maybe andrew your
thoughts
not hardcode the three scores together
okay
so not hard code the three scores and
what would you do instead
maybe take an input or i would
yeah i wouldn't i wouldn't write out the
scores themselves yeah another good
instinct it's kind of stupid that i've
written a program
compiled a program that only computes
the average for some student who
literally got those three test scores
and no others like there's no dynamism
here
moreover it's a little lazy too that i
called my variable score one score two
score three i mean where does it end
after that if i want to have a fourth
test next semester
now i have to go and have score four if
i've got a fifth score five
that starts to sort of be reminiscent of
last week's copy paste which really
wasn't the best practice
and so let me propose that we clean this
up and it turns out we can clean up this
up
by way of another topic another feature
of c that's also present in other
languages
known as arrays and if you happen to use
something called a list in scratch
very similar in spirit to scratches
lists but we didn't see those
in in lecture that first week an array
in c as in other languages is a
sequence of values stored in memory
back to back to back a sequence of
contiguous values so to speak
back to back to back so in that sense
it's like a list of values from left to
right
if we use the metaphor of the picture
we've been drawing so how might this be
germaine here
well it turns out that if you want to
store a whole bunch of values but
they're all kind of interrelated like
they're all
scores you don't have to resort to this
sort of lazy score one score two score
three score four score five at the score
99 depending on how many scores
there are why don't you just call all of
those numbers
scores but use a slightly different
syntax and that syntax
gives you access to what are called
arrays so the syntax here on the screen
is an example of declaring space for
three integers all at once and
collectively referring to all of them
as the word scores so there's no more
scores one two and three
all three of those scores are in a
variable called scores and what's new
here
is the square brackets inside of which
is a number
that literally connotes how many
integers do you want to store
under the name scores so what does this
allow me to do
it allows me still to define three
integers in that array so this array is
going to be a chunk of memory
back to back to back that i can put
values in and the way i put those values
is going to look syntactically like this
i still use numbers but now i'm using a
new notation
and it's similar to what i resorted to
before
but it's a little more generalized now
and dynamic now if i want to update the
very first score in that array
i literally write the name of the
variable scores bracket 0
close bracket and then assign it the
value if i want to get at the second
score i do scores bracket one
if i want the third score it scores
bracket two and the only thing that's a
little weird and a little
uh takes some getting used to is the
fact that we are zero
indexing our arrays so in past examples
like for loops and while loops i've sort
of said
it's a convention in programming to
start counting from zero
when it comes to arrays which are
contiguous sequences of values in a
computer's memory
they have to start at zero so otherwise
if you don't start counting at zero
you're literally going to be wasting
space
by overlooking one value so now if we
were to rename things on the screen
instead of calling these four these
three rectangles
score one score two score three they're
all called scores but if you wanna refer
specifically to the first one you use
this fancy bracket notation and the
second one
this bracket notation and the third one
this bracket notation but notice the
dichotomy
when declaring the array when
creating the array saying give me three
ins you use bracket three where bracket
three is the total number of values
when you index into the array that is
when you go
to a specific location in that chunk of
memory
you similarly use numbers but now those
are referring to their relative
positions position 0 position 1
position 2. this is the total number of
spaces
this is the specific space first second
and third all right so pictorially
nothing has changed just our
nomenclature really has
so let me go ahead and start to improve
this program taking in the advice
that was offered too on how we can
improve the design and get rid of the
sort of
the smelliness of it let me take the
first uh let me take the easiest
easiest of these approaches first by
just getting rid of these three separate
variables and instead giving me one
variable called scores
of size three an array of size three and
then i don't need to declare
score one score two again that's all
going away that's all going away that's
all going away now if i want to
initialize that array with these three
values i say scores bracket zero
and down here i say scores bracket one
and down here i say scores bracket
two so i've added one line of code but
notice the dynamism now if i want to
have a fourth one i can just allocate
here and then put in the value with
another line of code or five or six or
seven
or eight i don't have to start copying
and pasting all these different variable
names by convention
but i think if we take some of the
advice that was offered a moment ago we
can also clean this up by way of a loop
or such as well so let's do that let me
go ahead and give myself actually
first the cs50 library so that i can use
get
int and let's take this first piece of
advice which is let's start asking for a
score
using getint and i'm going to do this
three times
and i don't yeah i'm getting a little
lazy i'm getting a little bored already
so i'm going to copy paste and again
that does not bode well in general when
copying and pasting we can probably do
better still
but now i think i need to change just
one more thing here when doing the math
i want score zero
plus scores one plus scores two
but before i solve this problem here the
logic is still the same but i'm now
taking in dynamically three integers
there's still a smell to it as well it's
still not as well designed and so just
to
make clear what could i do be doing
better now
how could i clean up this code and make
it not just correct not just well styled
but better designed
what remains here nina what do you think
the code is like specific for only
three scores so you could like ask an
input toward like
how many scores it wants at the very
beginning
and then so like having score bracket
zero score vector one you could use a
for loop that
goes through from zero to um
n minus one or like less than n that
will like
ask and it should be like one line of
code instead
yeah really good it's the fact that we
have get in get in get in that's like
the first sign that you're probably
doing something sub
optimally it might be correct but it's
probably not well designed because i did
literally resort to copy paste
there's sort of a pattern here that i
could certainly integrate into something
like a loop so
let me do that let me actually get rid
of two of these lines of code
let me go up here and do something like
for int i get zero
i less than three for now i plus plus
let me open up this for loop let me
indent that remaining line of code
and instead of scores bracket zero this
is where arrays get really powerful
you can use a variable to index into an
array
that is to go to a specific location
what do i want to use for my variable
well i would think i here so now i've
whittled my lines of code down from all
three triplicate three nearly identical
lines into just one really inside of a
loop that's going to do the same thing
for me again
and again and as nina proposed too i
don't have to hard code these threes all
over the place maybe i could do
something like this
i could say something like in total gets
get
int and i might ask total number
of scores and i could literally ask the
human from the get-go
how many total scores are there then i
can even more powerfully
use this variable total in multiple
places
so that now i'm doing my math much more
dynamically this though
i'm afraid nina this broke a bit i'm
going to be
a little more i need to exert a little
more effort here on line 14 because now
i can't hard code
score 0 1 and 2 because if the number
the total number of scores is more than
that i need to do more addition if it's
fewer than that i need to do less
edition
so i think we've introduced a bug but we
can fix that but let me propose for just
a moment let's not make it dynamic
because i worry that's just made my life
harder
let's at least introduce one other
features here first
i'm going to go ahead up here and define
a new feature of c
today which is known as a constant if i
know in advance
that i want to declare a number that i
want to use again and again and again
without copying and pasting literally
that number 3 i can give myself a
constant
int via const int say
total equals three this declares what's
called a constant in programming
which is a feature of many languages
whereby you declare a variable of sorts
whose value can never change once you
set it
you cannot change it and that's a good
thing because one it shouldn't change in
the context of this program and two
just in case you the human are fallible
you don't want to accidentally change it
when you don't intend so this is a
feature of a programming language that
sort of protects you from yourself so
now i can sort of take an amalgam of my
instincts and neenahs
and use this variable total and actually
another convention when declaring
constants
is to capitalize them just to make
visually clear that there's something
different or special about this variable
so i'm going to change this to total and
i'm going to use that value here
and here and also down here but i'm
afraid
both nina and i have a little bit of
cleanup here to do in that i
still have hard-coded scores zero scores
one and scores
two and i want to add a changing number
of values together so you know what i've
got an idea
let me go ahead and create a function
that's going to compute an average for
me
so if i want to create my own function
that computes an average i want it to
return a floating point value just so
that we don't rent a truncate
any math i'm going to call this average
and the input to this function
is going to be the length of an array
and the actual
array and this is the last piece of
funky syntax for now
it turns out that when you want to pass
an array as input to a custom function
you literally use those square brackets
again but you don't specify the size and
the upside of this is that your function
then
can support an array that's got one
space in it two spaces
three a hundred it's more dynamic this
way
so how do i compute an average here i
can do this a few different ways but i
think
what was suggested earlier makes sense
where i can do some kind of summation so
let me do
in sum equals 0 because how do you
compute the average of a bunch of
numbers well you add them all together
and you divide by the total
well let's see how i might do that let
me do for int i get 0
i less than what should this be well if
i'm
being passed as this custom function
the length of the array and the actual
array i think i can iterate from i
up to length and then i plus plus on
each iteration
and then on each iteration i think i
want to do sum
plus whatever is in the array's
ith location so to speak so again this
is shorthand notation per last week
for this sum equals whatever sum is
plus whatever is in location i
of the array and once i've done all of
that
i think what i can do is return the
total sum
divided by the length of the array
and what i like about this whole
approach assuming my code's correct and
i don't think it is just yet
notice what i can do back up in main now
i can abstract away the notion of
calculating an average
and just do something like this
uh with this line of code here
so what did i just do a lot's going on
but let's focus for a moment on line 14
here on line 14 i'm still just printing
the average of some floating point
placeholder
but what i'm passing as input now is
this function
average whose inputs are going to be
total which again is just this constant
at the very top
oh sorry i goofed i should have
capitalized it which is just that
constant at the very top
and i'm passing in scores which again is
just
this array of all of those scores
meanwhile in the function in the context
of the function
notice that the names of the inputs to a
function
do not need to match the names of the
variables being passed into that
function so even though in main
they're called total and scores in the
context of my function average i can
call them x and y
a and b or more generically length in
array
i don't know what the array is but it's
an array of ints and i don't know how
long it is but that value
that answer is going to be in length but
there's still a bug here
there's still a bug and if we ignore
maine for a moment this is a subtle one
does anyone see a mistake that i've made
probably for the third time now over the
past
two weeks what mistake subtle have i
made here with my code
only in this average function
this one's a little more subtle but the
goal is to compute the average of a
whole bunch of integers
and return the answer nicholas you've
declared the
uh the variable within the function i've
declared the variable within the
function that's okay because i've
declared my variable sum here i think
you mean
but that's inside of the average
function
and i'm using some inside of the
outermost curly braces that it that was
defined so that's okay that's okay
let's take another thought here uh
olivia where might the bug still be
the return types of flow but you're
returning an n divided by an n
perfect so i again made that same stupid
mistake that's just going to get more
obvious as time goes on
that if i want to do floating point
arithmetic just like the aryan rocket
discussion the patriot missile like
these kinds of details matter in a
program now it's correct because i'm
actually going to ensure
that even though the uh the context here
is much less important than those real
world contexts just computing some
average of scores i'm not going to
accidentally truncate
any of my values so again in the context
here of this function average is just
applying some of last week's principles
i've got a variable
i've got a loop and i'm doing some
floating point arithmetic ultimately
and i'm now creating a function that
takes two inputs
one is length and one is the length one
is the array itself
and the return type as olivia notes is a
float
so that my output is also well defined
but what's nice about this again
you can think of these functions as
abstractions now
i don't need to worry about how i
calculate an average because i now have
this helper function
a custom function i wrote that can help
me answer that question
and here notice that the output of this
average function
will become an input into printf
and the only other feature i've added to
the mix here now are not only arrays
which allow us to
create multiple variables a variable
number of variables if you will
but also this notion of a constant if i
find myself using the same number again
and again and again
this constant can help me keep my code
clean and notice this
if next year maybe another semester
there's four scores or four tests
i change it in one place i recompile
boom
i'm done a well-designed program does
not require that you go reading through
the entirety of it fixing numbers here
and numbers there
changing it in one place can allow me to
improve this program make it support
four tests next year
instead of just the three but better
still would be
uh to take i think nina's advice before
which was to maybe just use get int and
ask the human
for how many tests they actually have
that too
would work well let me pause here to see
if there's any questions then
about arrays or about constants
or passing them around as inputs and
outputs
in this way
uh yeah over to uh sophia
i had a question about the use of a
float and why like the use of one flow
causes like the whole output to be a
float why does that occur
yeah really good question that's just
how c behaves so long as there is
one or more floating point values
involved in a mathematical formula
it is going to use that data type
which is the more powerful one if you
will rather than risk truncating
anything so you just need
one float to be participating in the the
formula in question
good question other questions on arrays
or constance or this passing around
of them yeah uh over to
alexandra i have a question
about the declaring of the the
array scores when you declared it in
maine
you said int scores and
in the brackets you have total can you
declare it without
the total
really good questions short answer no so
the way i did it is the way you do have
to do it and in fact if i highlight what
i did here
now it currently says total if i get rid
of that and i go back to our first
version
where i said something like 3 and 3 and
three
uh three over here uh you cannot do this
which i think alexander is what you were
proposing
the computer needs to know how big the
array is when you are creating it
the exception to that is that when
you're passing an array from one
function to another
you do not need to tell that custom
function how big the array is because
again you don't know in advance you're
writing a fairly generic dynamic
function
whose purpose in life is to take any any
array as
input of integers and any length and
respond
accordingly with an average that matches
the size of that thing
and those of you as an aside who have
programmed before especially in java
unlike in java and certain other
languages the length of an array is
not built into the array itself if you
do not
pass in the length of an array to
another function
there is no way to determine how big the
array is
this is different from java and other
languages where you can ask the array in
some sense what is its length in c
you have to pass both the array itself
and its length around separately
cena i just i'm still a little bit
confused about
how when we write that second command
when does it go when is it
when does it void in the parentheses and
when do we
uh define the ends because like as i
remember when we did
the get a negative number or get a
positive number it was void but we still
kind of gave it an input
i'm just not completely sold on that
sure good question let me go ahead and
open up that previous example which was
a little buggy but it has the right
syntax here so here was the get negative
in function
from before and as soon as you know it
was void as input
so there was one comment you made where
it still took input that was not so so
get negative in did not take any input
and case in point if we scroll up to
main
notice that when i called it on line 10
i said get
a negative in open parenthesis close
parenthesis with no inputs inside of
those parentheses
so this keyword void which we've seen a
few times now last week and this week
is just an explicit keyword in c that
says do not put anything here which is
to say
it would be incorrect for me up here
to do something like this like to pass
in a number or to pass in a prompt or
anything
inside of those parentheses the fact
that this function get negative in
takes void as its input means it does
not take any inputs whatsoever
that's fine forget negative in the name
of the function says it all like there's
no need to parameterize
or customize the behavior of get
negative int itself you just want to get
a negative int
by contrast though with the function we
just wrote
average this function does make
conceptual sense to take inputs because
you can't just say
give me the average like average of what
like it needs to take input so it's to
answer that question for you and the
input in this case is the array itself
of numbers
and the length of that array so you can
do the arithmetic
and so cena hopefully that helps make
the distinction you use void when you
don't want to take input and you
actually specify a comma separated
list of arguments when you do
want to take input all right so we
focused up until now
on integers really but let's let's
simplify a little bit because it turns
out
that arrays and memory actually
intersect to create some very familiar
features of most any computer program
namely
text or strings more generally so
suppose we
we simplify further no more integers no
more arrays of integers let's just start
for a moment
with a single character and write a
program that just creates
like a single brick from like that mario
game let me go ahead and create a
program here
called brick dot c and in brick dot c
i'm just going to include standardio.h
int main void and more on this void a
little later today
char c gets quote on quote hash
and then down here let me just go ahead
and print very simply
a placeholder percent c backslash n and
then output c so this is a pretty stupid
program
its sole purpose in life is to print a
single hash
as you might have in a mario pyramid of
height one so very simple
let me go ahead and make brick it seems
to compile okay
let me run it with dot slash brick and
voila we get a single brick but let's
consider for just a moment
exactly what just happened here
and what actually was going on
underneath the hood well you know what
i'm kind of curious i remember from last
week we could cast values from one thing
to another
what if i got a little curious and i
didn't print out c
which is this hash character as percent
c
which is a placeholder for a character
what if i got a little crazy and said
percent i
i think i could probably coerce this
char
by casting it to an end so i can see its
decimal
equivalent i could see its actual ascii
code so let me rebuild this with make
brick
now let me do dot slash brick and what
number
might we see last week we saw 72 a lot
73 and 33 for high
this week you can see 35 it turns out
is the code for an uh an ascii hash and
you can see this for instance
if i go to a website like let's go to
ascii chart.com
and sure enough if i go to the same
chart from last week
and i look for the hash symbol here its
ascii code is 35.
and it turns out in c if it's pretty
straightforward to the computer that yes
if this is a character i know i can
convert it to an end you don't have to
explicitly cast it
you can instead implicitly cast one data
type to another
just from context here so printf and c
are smart enough here to know okay
you you're giving me a character in the
form of variable c
but you want to display it as an i uh a
percent i
an integer that's going to be okay and
indeed i still see the number 35 so
that's just simple casting but let's now
put this into the context of today's
picture
how is that character laid out well
quite simply if this is my memory again
and we've gotten rid of all of the
numbers
c otherwise storing this hash is just
storing
is just being stored in one of these
bytes it only requires one square
because again a char
is a single byte
but equivalently 35 is the number that's
actually being stored there
but i wonder i wonder last week we spent
quite a bit of time storing not just
single characters but actual words like
hi
and other expressions and so what if i
were to do something like this let me go
back to my code
and let me not quite yet practice what i
just preached and let me give myself
three variables this time
c1 c2 and c3 and let me deliberately
store in those three variables
h i in all caps followed by an
exclamation point and per last week when
you're dealing with
individual characters you must in c use
single quotes
when you're dealing with multiple
characters otherwise known last week as
strings
use double quotes but that's why i'm
using single quotes because we're only
playing at the moment
with single characters now let me go
ahead and print these
values out let me print out percent c
percent c
percent c and i'll put c1 c2 c3
so this is perhaps the stupidest way you
could print out a full word
like hi exclamation point in c by
storing every single
character in its own variable but so be
it i'm just using these first primitive
these first principles here i'm using
percent c as my placeholder i'm printing
out these characters so let me do make
brick now
compile is okay and if i do dot slash
you know i really should have renamed
this file but we'll rename it in a
moment dot slash brick hi
and let me go ahead and do this let me
go ahead now and actually
close the file and recall from last week
if i want to rename my file
from brick.c let's say to high.c i can
use the move command
mv and now if i open up this file sure
enough there's high.c
and i've fixed my renaming mistake
all right so again if i now do make high
and i do dot slash high
voila i see the high but again this is
kind of a stupid way of
implementing a string but let's still
look underneath the hood let me go ahead
and get curious let me print out
percent i percent i and percent i and
let me include spaces this time just so
i can see
separation between the numbers let me
make high again
dot slash hi okay there's that 72
there's that 73 and there's that 33 from
last week
so that's interesting too so what's
going on underneath the hood in the
computer's memory
well when i'm storing these three
characters now i'm just storing them in
three different boxes so c1 c2 c3
and when you look at it collectively it
kind of looks like a whole word even
though it's of course just these
individual characters so what's
underneath the hood of course though is
72 73 33 or equivalently in binary
just this so the story is the same even
though we're now talking about chars
instead of integers but what happens
when i do this
what happens when i do string s gets
quote unquote high
using double quotes well let's change
this program accordingly
let me go ahead and do what we would
have done last week string
i'll call it s just for s for string hi
in all caps
i can simplify this next line let me use
percent s as a placeholder
for a string s but let's for now reveal
what a string really is because string
is a term of art every programming
language has strings
even if it doesn't technically have a
data type called string
c does not technically have a data type
called string
we have added this type to c by way of
cs50s library but now if i do make hi
notice that my code compiles okay and if
i do dot slash hi
enter voila i still see hi which is what
i would have seen last week as well
and if we depict this in the computer's
memory because hi
is three letters it's kind of like
saying well give me three boxes
and let me call this string s so this
feels like a reasonable
artist rendition of what s is if it's
storing a three-letter word like hi
but any time we have sequences of
characters like this
i feel like we're now seeing the
capability of a proper programming
language we introduced a little bit ago
the notion of a string
so maybe could someone redefine string
as we've been using it in terms of some
of today's nomenclature
like what is a string there's an example
of one hi
taking up three boxes but how did we
cs50 maybe implement string underneath
the hood
would you say what is it tucker
uh well it's an array of characters and
integers well if integers are used in
the string but it's an array of
basically
single characters perfect if we now have
the ability to express
very nicely done tucker if we now have
the ability to represent
sequences of things integers for
instance like scores well it stands to
reason that we can take another
primitive a very basic
data type like a char and if we want to
spell things with those chars like
english words
well let's just think of a string really
as an array
of characters an array of chars and
indeed that's exactly what
a string actually is so this thing here
high exclamation point
technically speaking is an array called
s and this is s bracket zero this is s
bracket one this is s bracket two
it's just an array called s now we
didn't use the word array last week
because it's not as familiar as the
notion of like a string of text for
instance
but a string is apparently just an array
and if it's an array that means we can
access if we want to
the individual characters of that array
by way of the square bracket notation
from today
but it turns out there's something a
little special
about strings as they're implemented
recall in our example involving
scores the only way we knew
how long that array was was because i
had a second variable called
length that's or total that stored the
total
number of integers in that array
that is to say in our scores example not
only did we allocate the array itself we
also kept
track of how many things were in that
array
with two variables however up until now
every time you and i have used the
printf function
and we have passed to that printf
function a string like
s we have only provided printf
with the string itself or logically we
have only provided printf
with the array of characters itself
and yet somehow printf is magically
figuring out
how long the string is after all when
printf prints the value of s
it is printing h i exclamation point and
that's it
it's not going and printing four
characters or five or
twenty right it stands to reason that
there's other stuff in your computer's
memory if you've got other variables or
other programs running
yet printf seems to be smart enough to
know given an array
how long the array is because quite
simply it only prints
out that single word so how then
does a computer know where a string ends
in memory
if all a string is as a sequence of
characters well it turns out
that if your string is length three as
is this one
h i exclamation point technically a
string
implemented underneath the hood uses
four bytes it uses four bytes
it uses a fourth byte to be initialized
to what we would describe as
backslash zero which is a weird way of
describing it
but this just represents a special
character otherwise known as the null
character
which is just a special value that
represents the end of a string
so that is to say when you still create
a string quote unquote with double
quotes h i exclamation point
yes the string is length three but
you're wasting or spending
four total bytes on it why because this
is a clue to the computer
as to where high ends and where the next
string
maybe begins it is not sufficient to
just start printing characters
inside of printf one at a time left to
right there needs to be the sort of
equivalent of a stop sign at the end of
the string saying
that's it for this string well what are
these values well let's convert them
back to decimal
72 73 33 that fancy backslash zero was
just a way of saying in
character form it's zero more
specifically
it is eight zero bits
inside of that square so to store a
string the computer unbeknownst to you
has been using one extra byte all zero
bits
otherwise written as backslash zero but
otherwise known as
literally the value zero so
this thing otherwise colloquially known
as null
is just a special character and we can
actually see it again if i go back to
my ascii chart.com from before
notice number zero is known as null
n-u-l
in all caps all right so with that said
what is powerful then about strings once
we have this capability well
let me go ahead and do this let me go
back into my code from a moment ago
and let me go ahead and enhance this
program a little bit just to get a
little
curious as to what's going on you know
what i can do
i bet what i can do here in this version
here is this
you know what if i want to print out all
of these characters of s
i can get a little curious again and
print out percent c
percent c percent c and if s is an array
per today's syntax i can technically do
s bracket 0
s bracket 1 s bracket 2
and then if i save this recompile my
code with make high
okay dot slash hi i still see hi
but you know what let me get a little
more curious let me use percent i
so i can actually see those ascii codes
let me go ahead and recompile with make
high
dot slash high there's the 7273
33 now let me get even more curious let
me print a fourth value
like this here s bracket three
which is the fourth location mind you so
if i now do make high
and dot slash high voila now you see
zero
and what this hints at is actually a
very dangerous feature of
c you know suppose i'm curious at seeing
what's beyond that
i could technically do s bracket four
the fifth location even though according
to my picture
there really shouldn't be anything at
the fifth location at least not that i
know about just yet
but i can do it in c nothing's stopping
me so let me do make high
dot slash high and that's interesting
apparently there's the number 37 what is
the number 37 well let me go back to my
ascii chart
and let me conclude that number 37 is a
percent sign so that's kind of weird
because i didn't print out an explicit
percent
now i'm kind of poking around the
computer's memory in places i shouldn't
be looking in some sense
in fact if i get really curious let's
look not at location 4 how about
location 40 like
way off into that picture make high
dot slash high 24 whatever that is i can
look at location 400
recompile my code make hi
dot slash hi and now it's zero again
so this is what's both powerful and also
dangerous about c you can touch
look at change any memory you want
you're essentially just on the honor
system not to touch memory that doesn't
belong to you and invariably especially
next week
are we going to start accidentally
touching memory that doesn't belong to
you
and you'll see that it actually can
cause computer programs to crash
including
programs on your own mac and pc yet
another source
of common bugs but now that we have this
ability to store
different strings or to think about
strings as
arrays well let's go ahead and consider
how you might have multiple strings in a
program so for instance if you were to
store
two strings in a program let's call them
s and t respectively
another programmer convention if you
need two strings call the first one s
then the second one t
maybe i'm storing high then buy well
what's the computer's memory going to
look like
well let's go let's do some digging high
as before is going to be stored here so
this whole thing refers to s and it's
taking four bytes because the last one
is that special null
character that just is the stop sign
that demarcates the end of the string
by meanwhile is going to take up another
b y e
exclamation point five bytes because i
need a fifth byte
to represent another null character and
this one deliberately wraps around
though again this is just an artist's
rendition
there's not necessarily a grid in
reality by exclamation point
backslash zero now represents t
so this is to say if i had a program
like this
where i had high and then buy and i
started
poking around the computer's memory just
using the square bracket notation
i bet i could start accessing the value
of b
or y or e just by looking a little past
the string s
so again as complicated as our programs
get all that's going on underneath the
hood is to just plop things down in
memory
in locations like these and so now that
we have this ability or maybe this
mental model for what's going on inside
of a computer
we can consider some of the features
that you might want to now use in
programs that you write
so let me go ahead here and whip up a
quick program for instance
that goes ahead and let's say
print out the total length of a string
let me go ahead and do this i'm going to
go ahead and create a new program here
in cs50s ide and i'm going to call this
one string
dot c and i'm going to very quickly at
the top include as usual
cs50.h and i'm going to go ahead and
include standardio.h
and i'm going to give myself int main
void and then in here i'm going to get
myself a string so
string s equals getstring and let me
just ask the human for some input
whatever it is
then let me go ahead and print out
literally the word output
just so that i can actually see the
result and then down here
let me go ahead and print out that
string for int i gets 0
i is less than huh i don't know what the
length of the string is yet so let me
just put a question mark there which is
not valid code but we'll come back to
this
i plus plus and then inside of the loop
i want to go ahead and print out every
character
one at a time by using my new array
notation and then at the very end of
this program i'm going to print a new
line
just to make sure the cursor is on its
own line so this is a complete program
that is now as of this week going to
treat a string as an array
ergo my syntax in line 10 that's using
my new fancy square bracket notation
but the only question i haven't answered
yet is this
how do i know when to stop printing the
string
how do i know when to stop well it turns
out thus far when we're using for loops
we've typically done something like just
count from
zero on up to some number this condition
though is any boolean expression i just
need to have a yes no
or a true false answer so you know what
i could do keep looping
so long as character at location i
and s does not equal backslash zero
so this is now definitely some new
syntax let me zoom in here
but s bracket i just means the ith
character in s
or more specifically uh the character at
position
i in s bang equals so bang is how a
programmer pronounces exclamation point
because it's a little faster bang
equals means does not equal so this is
how you would do an equal sign with a
slash through it in math it's in code
exclamation point equal sign and then
notice this funkiness
backslash zero is again the null
character
but it's in single quotes because again
it is by definition a character
and for reasons we'll get into another
time backslash zero
is how you express it just like
backslash n is kind of a weird escape
character for the new line
backslash zero is the character that is
all zeros
so this is kind of a different for loop
i'm still starting at zero
oh for i i'm still incrementing i as
always but i'm now
not checking for some pre-ordained
length because just like a computer
i do not know a priori where these
strings end i
only know that they end once i see
backslash zero
so when i now go down here and do make
string
it compiles okay dot slash string let me
type in something like
uh hello in all caps voila the output is
hello again let me do it again
buy in all caps and the output is bi so
it's kind of a useless program and that
it's just printing the same thing that i
typed in
but i'm conditionally using this boolean
expression to decide whether or not to
keep printing characters
now thankfully c comes with a function
that can answer this for me
it turns out there is a function called
stur lang
so i can literally just say well figure
out what the length of the string is
the function is called stir lang for
string length and it exists in a file
called not surprisingly perhaps string.h
string.h so now let me go ahead down
here and do make
string compiles okay dot slash string
type in hello and it still works so
this function sterling that does exist
in a library
via the header file string.h already
exists someone else wrote it but how did
they write it
odds are they wrote the first version
that i did by checking for that
backslash zero
but let me ask a subtle question here
this program is correct it iterates over
the whole length of the string and it
prints out
every character therein can anyone
observe
a poor design decision in this function
this one's subtle but there's something
i don't like about my for loop in
particular and i'll isolate it to line
nine
i've not done something optimally on
line nine there's an opportunity
for better design any thoughts here
on what i might do better
uh yeah jonathan yeah to
create basically another variable for
the stream length and to sort of
remember it
yeah and why are you suggesting that if
you want to use like a different
value for the stream length or if it
might fluctuate or change
you want to just have a different
variable as like a sort of placeholder
value for it
okay potentially but i will claim in
this case that because the human has
typed in the word
once you type in the word it's not going
to change but i think you're on the
right direction you're going down the
right direction because
in this boolean expression here i less
than the string length of s
recall that this expression gets
evaluated again and again and again
every time through a for loop
recall that you're constantly checking
the condition the condition in this case
is i less than the length of s the
problem is that sterling in this case
is a function which means there's some
piece of code someone wrote probably
similar to what i wrote a few minutes
ago
that you're constantly asking what's the
length of the string what's the length
of the string
and recall from our picture the way you
figure out the length of a string is you
start at the beginning of the string and
you keep checking am i at backslash zero
okay
am i at backslash zero okay so to figure
out the length of high it's going to
take me like one two three
four steps right because i have to start
at the beginning and i iterate
from location zero on to the end to find
out the length of buy it's going to take
me like 5 steps because that's how long
it's going to take me from left to right
to find that backslash 0. so what i
don't like about this line of code is
why are you asking for the string length
of s again and again
and again and again it's not going to
change in this context
so jonathan's point is taken if we keep
asking the user for more input
but in this case we've only asked the
human once so you know what let's take
jonathan's advice and do like int
n equals the string length of s
and then maybe you know what we could do
put n
in this condition instead so now i'm
asking the same question but i'm not
foolishly inefficiently asking the same
question
again and again whereby same question
requires
a good amount of work to find the
backslash zero again
and again and again now there's some
cleaning up we can do here too
it turns out there's this other subtle
feature of for loops if you want to
initialize another variable
to a value you can actually do this all
at once and you can do so
before the semicolon you can do comma
n equals sterling of s
and then you can use n just as i have
here so it's not all that much better
but it's a little cleaner in that now
i've taken two lines of code and
collapsed them
into one they both have to be of the
same data types but that's okay here
because both i
and n are so again the inefficiency here
is that it was foolish before that i
kept asking the same question
again and again and again but now i'm
asking the question once
remembering it in a variable called n
and only comparing i
against that integer which does not
actually change
all right i know that too was a lot
let's go ahead here and take a
three-minute break just to stretch legs
and whatnot
in three minutes we'll come back and
start to see applications now
of all of these features ultimately so
some problems that are going to
lie ahead this week on the readability
of language and also on cryptography so
we'll see you in three minutes
all right so we are back and this has
been a whole bunch of
low level details admittedly and where
we're going with this ultimately this
week and beyond is applications of some
of these building blocks and one of
those applications this coming week in
the next problem set
is going to be that of cryptography the
art of scrambling or encrypting
information
and if you're trying to encrypt
information like messages well those
messages might very well be written in
english or in ascii if you will
and you might want to convert some of
those ascii characters from one thing to
another
so that if your message is intercepted
by some third party
they can't actually decipher or figure
out what it is that you've sent
so i feel like we're almost toward we're
almost at the ability we're in code we
can start to convert
one word to another or to scramble our
text but we do need a couple of more
building blocks
so recall that we left off with this
picture here where we had two words in
the computer's memory high
and by both with exclamation points but
also both with these backslash zeros
that you and i do not put there
explicitly
they just happen for you anytime you use
the double quotes and anytime you use
the getstring
function so once we have those in memory
you can think of them as s and t
respectively but a string
s or t is just an array so again you can
also refer to all of these individual
characters or chars via the new square
bracket notation of today
s bracket 0 s1 s2 s3 and then
t bracket 0 t bracket 1 2 3
and 4 and then whatever else is in the
computer's memory but you know what you
can even do
is this suppose that instead we wanted
to have an array of
words so before we had an array of
scores an array of integers
but now suppose we wanted in the context
of some other program to have an array
of words you can totally do that there's
nothing stopping you from having an
array of words
and the syntax is going to be identical
notice if i want an array
of called words that has room for two
strings
i literally just say string words
bracket two this means hey computer give
me
an array of size two each of whose
members is going to be a string how do i
populate that array
same as before with the scores words
bracket zero gets quote unquote high
words bracket one gets quote unquote by
so that is to say with this code
could we create a picture similar to the
one previously but i'm not calling these
strings
s and t now i'm calling them both words
at two different locations zero and one
respectively so we could redraw that
same picture like this
now this word is technically named words
bracket zero
and this one is referred to by words
bracket one but again
what is a string a string is an array
and yet here we have an array of strings
so we kind of sort of have an array of
arrays
so we've got an array of words but a
word is just a string and a string is an
array of characters
so what i really have on the board is an
array of arrays
and so here and this will be the last
weird syntax for today
you can actually have multiple square
brackets back to back
so if your variable is called words and
that variable is an array
if you want to get the first word in the
array you do words bracket 0.
once you're at that word hi and you want
to get the first character
in that word you can similarly do
bracket zero
so the first bracket refers to what word
do you want in the array
the second bracket refers to what
character do you want in that word
so now the hot the i is at words bracket
zero bracket one
the exclamation point is at words
bracket zero bracket two
and the null characters at words bracket
zero bracket three
meanwhile the b is at words bracket one
bracket zero one one one two one
three one four so it's almost kind of
like a coordinate system if you will
it's a two dimensional
array or an array of arrays so this is
only to say
that if we wanted to think of arrays of
strings as individual
characters we can we have that
expressiveness now too
in code so what more can i do now that i
can manipulate things at this level
let me do a program that'll be pretty
applicable i think with some of our
upcoming programs as well let me call
this one uppercase
let me quickly write a program whose
purpose in life is just to convert
an input word to uppercase and let's see
how we can do this
so let me go ahead and include cs50.h
let me go ahead and include
standardio.h let me also include this
time
string dot h which is going to give us
functions like string length
and then let me do int main void and
then let me go ahead here and get a
string from the user like before so i'll
just gonna ask the user for
a string and i want them to give me
whatever the string should be before
i uppercase everything then i'm just
gonna go ahead and print out literally
after just so i can see what happens
after
i capitalize everything in the string
and now let me go ahead and do this
4 int i get 0 i less than
string length of s i plus plus wait a
minute i made that mistake before
let's not repeat this question let's
give myself a second variable
n gets string length of s i less than
n i plus plus so again this is now
becoming boilerplate anytime you want to
iterate over all of the characters in
the string
this probably is a reasonable place to
start and then let me ask the question i
want to iterate over every character in
the string that the human has typed in
and i want to ask myself a question
just as we've done with any algorithm
specifically i want to ask if the
current letter is lowercase
let me somehow convert it to uppercase
else let me just print it out on change
so how can i express that using last
week and this week's building blocks
well let me say something like this if
the character at a location i
in s or if the ith character in s
is greater than or equal to a lowercase
a
and the ith character
in s is less than or equal to a
lowercase
z what do i want to do let me go ahead
and print out
a character but that character should be
what
s bracket i but i'm not sure what to do
here yet
but let me come back to that else let me
go ahead and just print out
that character unchanged s bracket i
so minus the placeholder the question
marks i've put i'm kind of all the way
there
line 10 initializes i to zero it's going
to count all the way up to n
where n is the length of the string and
it's going to keep incrementing i so
we've seen that before and again that's
going to become
muscle memory before long line 12 is a
little new but it uses building blocks
from last week in this
this week we have the new square bracket
notation to get the i character in the
string s
greater than or equal to less than or
equal to we saw at least one of those
last week that just means greater than
or equal to
less than or equal to i mentioned
ampersand ampersand last week which is
the logical and operator which means you
can check
one condition and another and the whole
thing is true
if both of those are true this is a bit
weird today
but if you want to express is the
current character between lowercase a
and capital and lowercase z totally fine
to implicitly
treat a and z as numbers which they
really
are because again if we come back to our
favorite ascii chart
you'll see again that lowercase a has a
number associated with it
97. lowercase z has a number associated
with it
122. so if i really want it to be
pedantic
i could go back into my code and do
something like well if this is greater
than or equal to 97
and it's less than or equal to 122 but
like bad design
like i'm never going to remember that
lowercase z is 122. like no one's gonna
know that it makes the code less obvious
go ahead and write it in a way that's a
little more friendly to humans
like this but notice this question mark
how do i fill in this blank
well let me go back to the ascii chart
this is subtle
but this is kind of cool and humans were
definitely thinking ahead
notice that capital lowercase a is 97
capital a
is 65. lowercase b is 98
capital b is 66. and notice these two
numbers 67 to 90
65 to 97. 66 to 98
67 to 99. it would seem that
no matter what letters we compare
lowercase and uppercase
they're always 32 apart and that's
consistent we could do it all for all 26
english letters so if they're always 32
apart you know what i could do
if i want to take a lowercase letter
which is what i'm thinking about in line
i could just subtract off 32 in this
case it's not the cleanest because again
i'm probably going to forget that math
at some point but at least
mathematically i think that that'll do
the trick because 97 will become 65
98 will become 66 which is forcing those
characters to lower case but they're not
being printed as numbers
i'm still using percent c to coerce it
to be a char
so if i didn't mess any syntax up here
let me make uppercase
okay dot slash uppercase and let me go
ahead and type in for instance uh
my name in all lowercase and voila
uppercase now it's a little ugly i
forgot my backslash n so let me go ahead
and add one of those real quick
just to fix the cursor let me recompile
the code
with make uppercase let me rerun the
program with dot slash uppercase and now
type in my name
david let me do it again with brian and
notice that
it's capitalizing everything character
by character using only today's building
blocks
this is correct it's pretty well styled
because everything's nicely indented
it's very readable even though it might
look a little cryptic at first glance
but i think i can do better and i can do
better by using yet another library and
here's where
c and really programming in general gets
powerful the whole point of using
popular languages is because so many
other people before you have solved
problems
that you don't need to solve again and
i'm sure over the past like 50 years
someone has probably written a function
that capitalizes letters for me i don't
have to do this myself
and indeed there is another library
that i'm going to include by way of its
header file in c
type dot h which is the language c and a
bunch of type related things
and in c type dot h it turns out there's
a function
called there's a couple of functions
specifically
let me get rid of all of this code and
let me call a function called
is lower and past is lower s bracket i
and is lower as you might guess its
purpose in life is to return essentially
a boolean value true or false if that
character is lower
and if so well let me go ahead and print
out a placeholder
followed by the capitalization of that
letter now before i had to do that
annoying math with minus 32 and figure
it out
to upper bracket of
parenthesis s bracket i and now
i can otherwise just print out that
character unchanged just as before
s bracket i but now notice my program
honestly it's definitely a little
shorter it's a little
simpler in that there's just less code
and hopefully if the person that wrote
is lower and
too upper did a good job i know it's
correct i'm just standing on their
shoulders
and frankly my code's more readable
because i understand what is lower means
whereas that crazy ampersand ampersand
syntax and all of the additional code
that was just a lot harder to wrap your
mind around arguably
so now if i go ahead and compile this
make uppercase
okay that seemed to work well and now
i'm going to go ahead and do dot slash
uppercase and type in my name and all
lowercase again david seems to work
brian seems to work and i could do this
all day long
it seems to still work but you know what
i don't think i have to be even this
explicit you know what i bet if the
human who wrote two upper was smart
i bet i can just blindly pass in
any character to two upper and it's only
going to uppercase it if
it can be converted to uppercase
otherwise it will pass it through
unchanged so you know what let me get
rid of all of this stuff
and really tighten this program up and
print out a placeholder for c
and then two upper of s bracket i
and sure enough if you read the
documentation for this function it will
handle the case where it's either
lowercase or not lowercase and it will
do the right thing
so now if i recompile my code make
uppercase
so far so good dot slash uppercase david
again
voila it still works and notice truly
just how much tighter how much cleaner
how much shorter my code is
and it's more readable in the sense that
this function is pretty well named
to upper is what it's indeed called but
there is an important detail here
two upper expects as input a character
you cannot pass a whole word to it
it is still necessary at this point for
me to be using this loop
and doing it character by character now
how would you know this well you'll see
multiple examples
of this over the weeks to come but if i
go to
what's called the manual pages for the
language c we have our own web-based
version of them and we'll link this
for you in the courses labs and problem
sets as needed you can see a list of
all of the available functions in c at
least that are frequently used in cs50
and if we uncheck a box at the top we
can see even more functions there's
dozens maybe hundreds of functions
most of which we will not need or use in
cs50 but this is going to be true in any
language
you sort of pick up the building blocks
that you need over time
so we'll refer you to these kinds of
resources so that you don't rely only on
what we show
in section and lecture but you have at
your disposal
these other functions and toolkits as
well and we'll do the same with python
in sql
and other languages as well and so those
are what we call
again manual pages all right
a final feature before we even think
about cryptography and scrambling
information as for
problem set two so a command line
argument i mentioned by name before
it's like a word you can type after a
program's name
in order to provide an input at the
command line so make hello
hello is a command line argument to the
program hello
r m space a dot out a dot
out was an argument a command line
argument to the program rm when i wanted
to remove it so we've already seen
command line arguments in action
but we haven't actually written any
programs that allow you
to accept words or other inputs from the
so-called command line up until now
all of the input you and i have gotten
in our programs comes from getstring
getint and so forth we have never
been able to look at words that the
human might very well have typed at the
prompt
when running your program but that's all
about to change now
let me go ahead and create a program
called argv dot c and
this it'll become clear why in just a
moment i'm going to go ahead and include
shall we say standardio.h and then i'm
going to give myself
int main void and then i'm just going to
very simply
go back and change the void so just as
our own custom functions can take inputs
and we saw that with get negative int
we saw that with average today so does
main
potentially take inputs up till now
though we've been saying void and we
told you to say void last week and we
told you to say void
in problem set one but now it turns out
that c does allow you to put other
inputs into main
you can either say nope main does not
take any command line arguments
but if it does you can say literally
int arg c and string
argv with square brackets so it's a
little cryptic and technically you don't
have to type it precisely this way but
human convention would you have you do
it at least for now in this way
this says that main your function main
takes an integer
as one input and not a string
but an array of strings as input
and arg c is shorthand notation for
argument count
argument count is an integer that's
going to represent the number of words
that your users type at the prompt
argv is short for argument vector vector
is a fancy way of saying list
it is a variable that's going to store
in an array
all of the strings that a human types at
the prompt
after your own program's name so we can
use this for instance as follows
suppose that i want to let the user type
their own name at the command prompt i
don't want to use getstring i don't have
to prompt the human later for their name
i want them to be able to run my program
and give me their name all at once just
like make just like
rm and clang and other programs we've
seen so i'm going to do this
if argc equals equals 2 so if the number
of arguments to my program is two
go ahead and print out hello percent s
and plug in whatever is at arg v
one so more on this in just a moment
else
if argc is not equal to two let's just
go with last week's default
hello world so what is this program's
purpose in life
if the human types two words at the
prompt i want to say hello david hello
brian
hello so and so otherwise if they don't
type two words at the prompt
they're i'm just going to say the
default hello world so let me compile
this make argv
and i didn't get it right here unknown
type
string unknown type string all right i
goofed if i'm using string
recall that now i need to start using
the cs50 library and again we'll see all
the more why in the coming weeks as we
take those training wheels off
but now i'm going to do this again make
argv there we go now it works
dot slash argv enter hello world
that's pretty much equivalent to what we
did last week but notice
if i type in for instance rv1 david
enter it says hello david if i type in
rv
brian it says that if i type in brian u
it says hello world so what's going on
well the way you write programs in c
that accept
zero or more command line arguments that
is words
at the prompt after your program's name
is you change what we have been doing
all this time
from void to be this into argc
string arc v with square brackets and
what the computer is going to do for you
automatically is it going to store in
argc
a number of the total number of words
that the human typed in not just the
arguments technically all of the words
including your own program's name
it's then going to fill this array of
strings aka
argv with all of the words the human
typed at the prompt
so not just the arguments like brian or
david but also
the name of your program so if the human
typed in two total words which they did
argv brian r v david then i want to
print out
hello followed by a placeholder and then
whatever value is at r v one and i'm
deliberately not doing zero
if i did zero based on the verbal
definition i just gave if i recompile
this program
i don't want to see this hello argv
so the program's own name is
automatically always stored for you
at the first location in that array but
if you want the first
useful piece of information you actually
would after recompiling the code here
access it at bracket one and so in this
way
do we see an argv that we can actually
access individual words but notice this
too
suppose i want to print out all of the
individual characters
in someone's input you know what i bet i
could even do this
let me go ahead and do this instead of
just printing out hello let me do for
int i gets zero n equals the string
length
of arg v whoops arg v one
and then over here i'm gonna do i is
less than n i plus plus
all right so i'm going to iterate over
all of the characters
in the first real word in argv
and what am i going to do well let me go
ahead and print out
a character that's at rv1
but at location i so i said a moment ago
with our picture
that we could think of an array of
strings as really just being an array of
arrays
and so i can employ that syntax here
by going into argv1 to get me the word
like david or brian or so forth
and then further index into it with more
square brackets that get me the d
the a the v the i the d and so forth and
just to be super clear let me put a new
line character there
just so we can see explicitly what's
going on and let me go ahead now and
just delete this hello world because i
don't want to see any hellos i just want
to see the word the human typed in
make argv whoops
what did i do wrong oh i use sterling
when i shouldn't have because i haven't
included
string dot h at the top okay
now if i recompile this code and
recompile make argv there we go dot
slash argv
david you'll see one character per line
and if i do the same with brian's name
or anyone's name
and change it to brian i'm printing one
character at a time so again i'm not
sure why you would want to do that but
in this case my goal simply
was to not only iterate over the
characters in
that first word but print them out so
again just by applying
twice over this time this principle can
we actually
see that a program has access to the
individual characters in each of these
strings
all right and one last explanation
before we introduce the crypto and
application thereof
this thing here this thing here does
anyone have any idea as to why
maine last week and this week seems to
return an
int even though it's not an average
function it's not a get positive in
function it's not get negative in
somehow for some reason main keeps
returning an int even though we have
never
seen this int in action what might this
mean
this is the one last piece that we
promised last week we would eventually
explain what might this mean
and this one's a tough one brian who do
we have
how about uh great is it
usually the functions in the end uh have
returned
zero and that means that the function
stops
and that zeros is like is the integer
that pops out of the main function yeah
and this is one this one's subtle in
that
if you had programmed before odds are
and i'm guessing you have grad you've
seen this in use before
we humans though in the real world of
like using macs and pcs
you've actually seen numbers integers in
weird places frankly almost
any time your computer freezes or you
see an error message
odds are you see in english or some
spoken language in the error message
but you very often see a numeric code
for instance if you're having zoom
trouble you'll often see the number five
in the error window
in zooms program and five just means
you're having network issues so
programmers often associate integers
with things that can go wrong
in a program and it's great grid notes
they use
zero to connote that nothing has gone
wrong
that all is well so let me write one
final program here
just called exit.c that puts this to the
test let me go ahead and write a program
in a file called exit dot c that's going
to introduce what we're going to call
an exit status this is a subtlety that
will be useful as our programs get a
little more complicated i'm going to go
in here and do
include cs50.h and i'm going to go ahead
and
include standardio.h and i'm going to
give myself the longer version of main
so
int argc string argv with the square
brackets
and in here i'm going to say if argc
does not
equal to the human is not doing what i
want them to and i'm going to yell at
them in some way i'm going to say
missing command line argument so any
kind of error message that i want the
human to see on the screen
i'm just going to tell them with that
message but i'm going to very subtly
return the number one i'm going to
return an error code and the human is
not necessarily going to see this code
but if we were to have a graphical user
interface or some other feature to this
program
that would be the number they see in the
error window that pops up just like zoom
might show you the number five if
something has gone wrong
similarly if you've ever visited a web
page frankly and you
the web page doesn't exist you see the
integer 404
that's not technically the exact same
incarnation of this but it is
representative of programmers using
numbers to represent errors so that one
you probably have seen
here i'm going to go ahead though and by
default say hello
percent s just like before passing in
whatever is in rgv1 so same program as
before
but i'm not going to do any of this lame
like oh hello world if the human doesn't
type in their name as i expect
instead i am going to check did the
human give me two words at the command
line
if not i'm going to print missing
command line argument and then return
this
exit code otherwise if all is well i'm
going to go ahead and return
explicitly zero this is another number
that the human you and i are never going
to see
but we could have access to it and
frankly for course purposes
uh check 50 can have access to this and
graphical user interfaces when we get
to those can have access to these values
so
zero is great notes is just all as well
but
one would mean that something goes wrong
so let me go ahead and make exit which
is kind of appropriate as we're wrapping
up here
and let me go ahead and do dot slash
exit missing command line argument
is what's displayed if i go ahead and
say exit david
now i see hello david or exits brian
i'll see exit brian now this is not a
technique you'll need to use often but
you can
actually see these return values if you
want
if i run exit and i see this error
message i can very weirdly say echo
dollar sign question mark which is a
very admittedly cryptic way of saying
what was my exit status and if you hit
enter you'll see one
by contrast if i run exit of david and i
actually see hello david
and i do echo dollar sign question mark
now
i will see zero so again this is not a
technique you and i will use very
frequently but it's a capability of a
program and it's a capability of c
that you do now have access to and so in
writing programs moving forward
what we will often do in labs and in
problem sets and the like
is ask you to return from maine
either zero or one or maybe two or three
or four
based on the problems that might have
gone wrong in your program that you have
detected
and responded to appropriately so it's a
very effective way of handling errors in
a standard way
so that you know that you are being
proactive about detecting mistakes
so what kinds of mistakes might we
handle this week and what kinds of
problems might we solve
well today was entirely about
deconstructing what a string is
last week it was just a sequence of text
a chunk of text today
it's now an array of characters and we
have new syntax in c
for accessing those characters we also
today have access to more libraries more
header files the documentation therefore
so that we can actually solve problems
without writing as much code
ourselves we can use other people's code
in the form of these libraries
so one problem we will solve this coming
week by way of problem set two is that
of readability
like when you're reading a book or an
essay or a paper or anything
what is it that makes it like a third
grade reading level or a 12th grade
reading level or university reading
level well all of us probably have an
intuitive sense right like if it's big
font and short words it's probably y for
younger kids
and if it's really complicated words
with big vocabulary and things we don't
know
maybe it's meant but for university
audiences but we can quantify this a
little
more formulaically not necessarily the
only way but we'll give you a few
definitions so for instance here's a
famous sentence
mr and mrs dursley of number four privet
drive we're proud to say that they were
perfectly normal thank you very much
and so forth well what is it about this
text that puts harry potter at
grade 7 reading level well it probably
has to do with the vocabulary words but
it probably
has to do with the lengths of the
sentences the amount of punctuation
perhaps
the total number of characters that you
might count up
you can imagine quantifying it just
based generically
on the look and the aesthetics of the
text what about this in computational
linguistics authorship attribution is
the task of predicting the author of
document of unknown authorship this task
is generally performed by the analysis
of stylometric features particular
this is brian's senior thesis so this is
not a seventh grade reading level this
was actually rated at grade 16 so
brian's
pretty sophisticated when it comes to
writing theses but there too
you could perhaps glean from the
sophistication of the sentences the
length thereof and the words they're in
there's something we could perhaps
quantify so as to apply numbers and
indeed that's one
way you could assess the readability of
a text even if you don't have access to
a dictionary
with which to figure out which are the
actual big or small words
and what about cryptography so it's
incredibly
common these days and so important these
days for you and i to use cryptography
not necessarily uh using algorithms we
ourselves come up with but rather using
software like whatsapp and signal and
telegram and messenger and others
that support encryption between you and
the third party your friend or family
or at least minimally the website with
which you're interacting so cryptography
is the art of scrambling
information or hiding information and if
that information is text well frankly as
of this third week of cs50 we already
have the requisite building blocks
for not only representing text but we
saw today manipulating it even just
uppercasing characters allows us to
start mutating text
well what does it mean to encrypt
information well it's like our black box
from last week
you have some input you want some output
the input we're going to start calling
plain text
the message you want to send from
yourself to someone else
ciphertext is the output that you want
and so in between there there's going to
be what we're going to call a cipher
a cipher is an algorithm that encrypts
or
scrambles its input so as to produce
output that a third party can't
understand and hopefully that cipher
that algorithm is a reversible process
so that when you receive the scrambled
ciphertext you can figure out
what it was that the the person sent to
you
but the key to using cryptography pun
intended
is to also have a secret key so if you
think back to grade school maybe you
were flirting with someone in class
and you sent them a note on a piece of
paper well hopefully you didn't just say
like i love you on the piece of paper
and then pass it through all of your
friends or let alone the teacher to
to the ultimate recipient maybe you did
something like an
a becomes a b a b becomes a c a c
becomes a d
like you kind of apply an algorithm to
like add one to all of the letters so
that if the teacher does intercept it
and look
at it they probably don't have enough
care in the world to figure out what
this is it's just going to look like
nonsense
but if your friend knows that you
changed a to b b to c by adding one to
every letter
they could reverse that process and
decrypt it
so the key for instance might be
literally the number one the message
literally might be i love you
but what would the ciphertext be or the
output well let's consider
i love you is a string which as of today
is an array of characters
so what useful what use is that well
let's consider exactly that phrase as
though it's an array
it's an array of characters we know from
last week characters
are just integers decimal integers
thanks to ascii and in turn unicode
so it turns out i we already know is 73
and if we looked up all the others on a
chart
l is 76 79 86
69 89 79 85
so we could relatively easily and see
you might have to check your notes and
check my sample code and so forth
but relatively easily in c convert i
love you
to the corresponding integers by just
casting so to speak chars
to integers i could very easily
mathematically using the plus operator
in c
start to add one to every one of these
characters
thereby encrypting my message but i
could send my friend these numbers but i
might as well make it a little more user
friendly and cast it back from integers
to chars
so now it would seem that the ciphertext
for i love you if using a key
of one and one just means change a to b
not a to c
just move it by one place this is the
ciphertext for an encrypted
message of i love you and so the whole
process becomes
one is the input is the key i love you
is the input as the plain text
and the output ultimately is this
unpronounceable phrase that again if the
teacher
or some friend intercepts they probably
don't know what's going on
and indeed this is the essence of
cryptography the algorithms that you
protect are emails and texts and
financial information and health
information is hopefully way more
sophisticated
than that particular algorithm and it is
but it reduces to the same process
an input key and an input text followed
by some
output the so-called ciphertext and this
has been with us for decades now in some
form
sometimes even mechanical form back in
the day you could actually get
these little circular devices that have
letters on the alphabet on one side
other letters on the alphabet on the
other side and if you rotate one or the
other
a might line up with b b might line up
with c so you can have even a physical
incarnation
of cryptography just as was popular
in a movie that seems to play endlessly
on tv at least here in the u.s
around christmas time and you might
recognize if you've seen a christmas
story
one such look so we'll use just a couple
of minutes of our final moments together
to take a look at this real world
incarnation of cryptography that
undoubtedly you can probably see on tv
this fall be it known to on sunday that
ralph parker is hereby appointed a
member of the little orphanage secret
circle and is entitled to all the honors
and benefits occurring there too
signed little orphan annie
counter-signed
pierre andre in ink honors and benefits
already at the age of nine
[Music]
come on let's get on with it i don't
need all that jazz about smugglers and
pirates
listen tomorrow night for the concluding
adventure of the black
pirate ship now it's time for any secret
message
for you members of the secret circle
remember kids only members of any secret
circle
can decode any secret message remember
annie is depending on you
set your pins to be too here
is the message 12 11. i am in
my first secret meeting 5 14
11 18 16. oh pierre was in great voice
tonight
i could tell that tonight's message was
really important
3 25 that's a message from annie herself
remember don't tell anyone
[Music]
90 seconds later i'm in the only room in
the house where a boy of nine could sit
in privacy and decode
aha b i went to the next
e the first word is b
s it was coming easier now uh
[Music]
oh be sure to be sure to what
what was little orphanage trying to say
be sure to watch
randy have got to go will you please
come out all right
ma i'll be right out i was getting
closer now
the tension was terrible what was it the
fate of the planet may hang in the
balance
[Music]
sheet almost there my fingers flew my
mind was a steel trap
every pore vibrated it was almost clear
yes yes yes yes be sure
to drink your ovalt
ovaldeen
a crummy commercial
[Music]
son of a all right that's it for
cs50 we will see you
next time
[Music]
[Applause]
you